Journal Pre-proof

The Heart in COVID19: Primary Target or Secondary Bystander?

Peter Libby

PII:

DOI:

S2452-302X(20)30154-6

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2020.04.001

Reference:

JACBTS 440

To appear in:

JACC: Basic to Translational Science

Received Date: 8 April 2020

Accepted Date: 8 April 2020

Please cite this article as: Libby P, The Heart in COVID19: Primary Target or Secondary Bystander?,
JACC: Basic to Translational Science (2020), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2020.04.001.

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2020 Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.

The Heart in COVID19: Primary Target or Secondary 

Bystander? 

Peter Libby1 

 
 
1From the Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston MA 
 

*Correspondence to Peter Libby, MD, Department of Medicine, Cardiovascular Division, 

Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 77 avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 

02115, USA. Email: plibby@bwh.harvard.edu. Phone: (617) 525-4383. 

Dr. Libby receives funding support from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 

(R01HL080472 and 1R01HL134892), the American Heart Association (18CSA34080399), and 

Funding 

the RRM Charitable Fund. 

Disclosures 

Dr. Peter Libby is an unpaid consultant to, or involved in clinical trials for Amgen, AstraZeneca, 

Esperion Therapeutics, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Kowa Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Pfizer, Sanofi-

Regeneron, and XBiotech, Inc. PL is a member of scientific advisory board for Amgen, Corvidia 

Therapeutics, DalCor Pharmaceuticals, IFM Therapeutics, Kowa Pharmaceuticals, Olatec 

Therapeutics, Medimmune, Novartis, and XBiotech, Inc. Dr. Libby serves on the Board of 

XBiotech, Inc. Dr. Libby’s laboratory has received research funding in the last 2 years from 

Novartis. 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Summary: 

In the throes of the current COVID-19 pandemic, interest has burgeoned in the cardiovascular 
complications of this virulent viral infection. As troponin, a biomarker of cardiac injury, often 
rises in hospitalized patients, its interpretation and actionability require careful consideration. 
Fulminant myocarditis due to direct viral infection can certainly occur, but patients with 
increased oxygen demands due to tachycardia and fever, and reduced oxygen delivery due to 
hypotension and hypoxemia can cause myocardial injury indirectly. Cytokines released during 
the acute infection can elicit activation of cells within pre-existing atherosclerotic lesions, 
augmenting thrombotic risk and risk of ischemic syndromes. Moreover, microvascular activation 
by cytokines can cause not only myocardial injury but harm other organ systems commonly 
involved in COVID-19 infections including the kidneys. Dealing with the immense challenge of 
COVID-19 disease, confronted with severely ill patients in dire straits with virtually no rigorous 
evidence base to guide our therapy, we must call upon our clinical skills and judgment. These 
touchstones can help guide us in selecting patients who might benefit from the advanced imaging 
and invasive procedures that present enormous logistical challenges in the current context. 
Lacking a robust evidence base, pathophysiologic reasoning can help guide our choices of 
therapy for individual clinical scenarios. We must exercise caution and extreme humility, as 
often plausible interventions fail when tested rigorously. But act today we must, and 
understanding the multiplicity of mechanisms of myocardial injury in COVID-19 infection will 
help us meet our mission unsupported by the comfort of strong data. 
 

 

2 

 

 

 

 

In the throes of the current pandemic, intense interest has burgeoned in cardiovascular 

involvement by the novel coronavirus known as COVID-19. Cardiologists as well as other 

practitioners who care for those with this virulent viral infection, and indeed the general public as 

well, share curiosity in this regard. The torrent of literature on this nascent topic contains clear-
cut descriptions of fulminant myocarditis in certain individuals1, 2, as ably reviewed in the State 

of the Art paper on cardiac involvement in COVID 19 by Atri and colleagues, “COVID-19 for 

the Cardiologist: A State-of-the-Art Review of the Virology, Clinical Epidemiology, Cardiac and 

Other Clinical Manifestations and Potential Therapeutic Strategies” in this issue of JACC: Basic 
to Translational Science.3 Indeed, the human myocardium can express the receptor that COVID-

19 uses to infect host cells, angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE-2), the counterregulatory 

cousin of the more familiar ACE-1. Thus, no doubt in some cases a viral myocarditis due to this 

agent can occur (Figure 1, far left). Yet, troponin rise seems nearly ubiquitous in patients 

requiring intensive care, an indication of cardiac involvement in many cases, and a marker of 

poor prognosis, as in many other circumstances. But can we, and should we, attribute all rises in 

troponin to direct myocardial infection by this virus? 

To approach this question, we need to distinguish myocarditis due to infection of cardiac cells 

from myocardial ischemic injury. Flow embarrassment to the heart muscle can result from 

lesions in epicardial coronary arteries or in the heart’s microvasculature. Cardiac ischemia can 

also arise from an imbalance between oxygen supply and demand, a type 2 acute coronary 

syndrome, a situation that can prevail in acute infections, particularly those that affect the lungs 

like COVID19. Several of these pathophysiologic pathways to myocardial ischemia may affect 

those without substantial or obstructive coronary artery atherosclerosis. Hence, the distinction 

between these various mechanisms has important clinical consequences. The need for arduous 

imaging studies and invasive evaluation may vary considerably in these different scenarios, an 

issue of great import in acute care facilities stretched to or beyond their limits during a pandemic 

with a readily contagious and virulent infectious agent such as COVID19. Considering the 

pathophysiologic paths to cardiac injury can inform judgement regarding the necessity of 

transport of severely ill patients and the performance invasive procedures.  

3 

A Panel convened by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in 1997 considered the roles 

of  infectious  agents  in  cardiovascular  disease.  The  summary  report  of  this  panel  explicitly 

considered systemic infection and the triggering of acute coronary events and reviewed some of 
the  possible  mechanisms.4  These  considerations  included  cytokine  responses  to  infection  as 

activators  of  vascular  cells  and  as  inducers  of  the  acute  phase  response  with  consequent 

heightened  production  of  fibrinogen,  the  precursor  of  clots,  and  of  endogenous  inhibitors  of 

fibrinolysis.  More  recent  panels  convened  in  conjunction  the  National  Heart,  Lung,  and  Blood 

Institute  re-examined  this  issue  and  highlighted  the  differences  between  direct  infection  and 
secondary  responses.5  The  COVID19  pandemic  elevates  these  pathophysiologic  considerations 

from theoretically interesting to a level of vital clinical importance. The paper by Atri et al. deals 

comprehensively  with  cardiac 

involvement.3  This  commentary  and 

the  accompanying 

illustrations place these considerations in the context of inflammation and vascular biology 

Remote infection can elicit “echoes” in the preexisting atherosclerotic lesion 

The demographic most often affected by life-threatening and fatal COVID-19 has a high prior 

probability of pre-existing atherosclerotic lesions: the elderly, evident male predominance, and 

those with pre-existing lung disease including that associated with cigarette smoking, a risk 

factor for atherosclerosis. Remote infections such as the severe pneumonitis that too commonly 

complicates COVID-19 can elicit an acute exacerbation of the chronic smoldering inflammation 

that characterizes coronary atherosclerotic lesions (Figure 2). The inflammatory cells at a site of 

regional infection such as the lungs in COVID19 pneumonitis can produce cytokines such as 

interleukins (IL)- 1 and -6, and tumor necrosis factor, mediators that not only propagate local 

inflammation but can enter the systemic circulation. Such circulating cytokines can stimulate 

macrophages within the plaque to augment local cytokine production and provoke an increase in 

tissue factor expression that renders lesions more thrombogenic.  We have referred to this local 
response to systemic stimuli as an “echo” phenomenon. 4, 6  These same systemic cytokines can 

stimulate leukocyte adhesion molecule expression on the endothelial cells overlying established 

atheroma, boosting local recruitment of these inflammatory cells. These alterations in pre-

existing plaques can enhance their propensity to disrupt, be it by fibrous cap fissure or by 

superficial erosion, and provoke an acute coronary syndrome.   

4 

 

 

 

Remote infection can also activate the coronary microvasculature  

Even in individuals without pre-existing epicardial coronary artery disease, systemic cytokines 

released from sites of local infections such as in pneumonitis can affect intermural coronary 

vessels. They also can activate the microvascular endothelium, predisposing to vasomotor 

abnormalities, augmented thrombosis, reduced fibrinolysis, increased leukocyte adhesion, and 

other aspects of dysfunction of the microvessels of the coronary circulation. These effects 

wrought by distant infection can contribute to myocardial ischemia even in the absence of 

epicardial atherosclerosis, and could compound cardiac injury in those with flow limitation due 

to plaque in the larger coronary arteries. 

Infection, and pneumonia in particular, can worsen the balance between myocardial 

oxygen supply and demand 

The cardinal signs of infection include fever and tachycardia, circumstances that increase the 

oxygen requirements of the myocardium (Figure 3). Hypoxemia produced by pneumonitis can 

decrease oxygen delivery to the myocardium. Hypotension in sepsis and in cytokine storm can 

impair coronary perfusion. Together these systemic effects of infection conspire to limit blood 

flow in the coronary arteries, and reduce oxygen supply while augmenting myocardial oxygen 

demand. These consequences of infection predispose to myocardial ischemia. They may 

aggravate the consequences of plaques that would not limit flow or provoke ischemia under 

usual conditions, and could produce ischemic injury even in those with little or no coronary 

artery atherosclerosis. 

different degrees 

Multiple mechanisms may contribute to cardiac complications of COVID19 disease in 

At one end of the spectrum, a young individual with pristine coronary arteries might suffer 

severe myocardial injury due to a fulminant myocarditis caused by direct infection with COVID-

19 (Figure 1, left). At the other extreme, a person with advanced coronary atherosclerosis could 

suffer a type 1 or type 2 acute myocardial infarction without direct viral infection of cardiac cells 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Figure 1, right). Although we are early in our experience with this novel coronavirus disease, 

most patients affected by COVID-19 encountered by cardiologists may have more secondary 

cardiac involvement then primary infective myocarditis. Thus, many of our patients may fall into 

the zone between the two bookends depicted in Figure 1. 

It behooves us to consider the multiple mechanisms of cardiac injury in patients with COVID-19 

disease (Figure 4). As in the BC (before COVID) era, interpretation of rises in cardiac troponin 

requires consideration of the context of the clinical situation. Not all rises in this biomarker of 

cardiac injury will result from coronary artery disease requiring invasive assessment or 

intervention. We urgently need randomized clinical trials to assess the value of interventions 

including anti-inflammatory therapies ranging from glucocorticoids to cytokine antagonism in 
addition to antiviral agents as outlined in the elegant exposition of Atri et al.3   

Dealing with the immense challenge of COVID-19 disease, and confronted with severely ill 

patients in dire straits with virtually no rigorous evidence base to guide our therapy, we need to 

call upon our clinical skills and judgment. These touchstones can help guide us in selecting 

patients who might benefit from the advanced imaging and invasive procedures that present 

enormous logistical challenges in the current context. In the absence of a robust evidence base, 

we will also need to invoke pathophysiologic reasoning to guide our choices of therapy for each 

individual clinical scenario. We must do so with caution and extreme humility, recognizing how 

often plausible interventions fail when tested rigorously. But act today we must, and the 

overview of Atri et al. and other recent compendia will help us meet our mission unsupported by 
the comfort of strong data.3 

 

6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure legends  

Figure 1: This hypothetical diagram represents the spectrum of myocardial involvement in 

COVID-19. On the extreme left, a case of fulminant myocarditis could occur in an individual 

with no coronary artery atherosclerosis. On the extreme right, an individual could have an acute 

coronary syndrome because of severe pre-existing lesions triggered to cause an event due to the 

consequences of infection described in the text.  

Figure 2: This diagram depicts how inflammatory infectious processes in remote locations 

including the lungs can produce systemic effects that can promote atherothrombotic events and 

myocardial ischemia, and also evoke “echoes” within the plaque itself that can predispose 
towards plaque disruption, or acute progression of the disease (From5) 

Figure 3: This figure depicts how physiologic changes associated with infection can tip the 

balance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand to favor myocardial ischemia. See the 
text for details. (Adapted from5) 

Figure 4: Infection has multiple effects that may impinge on the cardiovascular system and 

provoke events. In addition to the aspects detailed in the previous figures, infection may 

predispose towards thrombosis and reduced fibrinolysis as explained in the text. The 

consequences of infection may also alter the function of macro- or micro-vascular endothelium 
and thus contribute to cardiovascular complications of COVID-19 disease. (From5) 

 

7 

References: 

1. 

Hu H, Ma F, Wei X and Fang Y. Coronavirus fulminant myocarditis treated with 

glucocorticoid and human immunoglobulin. European Heart Journal. 2020. 

2. 

Inciardi RM, Lupi L, Zaccone G, Italia L, Raffo M, Tomasoni D, Cani DS, Cerini M, 

Farina D, Gavazzi E, Maroldi R, Adamo M, Ammirati E, Sinagra G, Lombardi CM and Metra 

M. Cardiac Involvement in a Patient With Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA 

Cardiology. 2020. 

3. 

Atri D, Siddiqi HK, Lang J, Nauffal V, Morrow DA and Bohula EA. COVID-19 for the 

Cardiologist: A State-of-the-Art Review of the Virology, Clinical Epidemiology, Cardiac and 

Other Clinical Manifestations and Potential Therapeutic Strategies. JACC: Basic to 

Translational Science. 2020. 

4. 

Libby P, Egan D and Skarlatos S. Roles of infectious agents in atherosclerosis and 

restenosis: an assessment of the evidence and need for future research. [Review] [91 refs]. 

Circulation. 1997;96:4095-103. 

5. 

Libby P, Loscalzo J, Ridker PM, Farkouh ME, Hsue PY, Fuster V, Hasan AA and Amar 

S. Inflammation, Immunity, and Infection in Atherothrombosis: JACC Review Topic of the 

Week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:2071-2081. 

6. 

Libby P, Nahrendorf M and Swirski FK. Leukocytes Link Local and 

Systemic Inflammation in Ischemic Cardiovascular Disease. Journal of the American College of 

Cardiology. 2016;67:1091-1103. 

 

 

 

 

8 

