Journal Pre-proof

COVID-19 for the Cardiologist: A Current Review of the Virology, Clinical
Epidemiology, Cardiac and Other Clinical Manifestations and Potential Therapeutic
Strategies

Deepak Atri, MD, Hasan K. Siddiqi, MD MSCR, Joshua Lang, MD, Victor Nauffal, MD,
David A. Morrow, MD MPH, Erin A. Bohula, MD DPhil

PII:

DOI:

S2452-302X(20)30157-1

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2020.04.002

Reference:

JACBTS 443

To appear in:

JACC: Basic to Translational Science

Received Date: 7 April 2020

Accepted Date: 7 April 2020

Please cite this article as: Atri D, Siddiqi HK, Lang J, Nauffal V, Morrow DA, Bohula EA, COVID-19 for
the Cardiologist: A Current Review of the Virology, Clinical Epidemiology, Cardiac and Other Clinical
Manifestations and Potential Therapeutic Strategies, JACC: Basic to Translational Science (2020), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacbts.2020.04.002.

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2020 Published by Elsevier on behalf of the American College of Cardiology Foundation.

 

 

 

 

 

COVID-19 for the Cardiologist: A Current Review of the Virology, Clinical Epidemiology, 

Cardiac and Other Clinical Manifestations and Potential Therapeutic Strategies 

Deepak Atri MD*, Hasan K. Siddiqi MD MSCR*, Joshua Lang MD, Victor Nauffal MD, David 

A. Morrow MD MPH, and Erin A. Bohula MD DPhil 

Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 

*Denotes co-first authors. 

Corresponding Author:  

Erin A. Bohula MD DPhil 

350 Longwood Ave 

First Office Floor 

Boston, MA 02115 

Email: ebohula@bwh.harvard.edu 

 

1 

Highlights 

-  Severe acute respiratory virus-2 (SARS-CoV2), the infection responsible for coronavirus 
disease-2019 (COVID-19), has spread globally leading to a devastating loss of life.  In a 
few short months, the clinical and scientific communities have rallied to rapidly evolve 
our understanding of the mechanism(s) of disease and potential therapeutics. 

-  This review discusses the current understanding of the basis virology of SARS-CoV2 and 
the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, including cardiovascular, and mortality of 
COVID-19.  A detailed review of the viral life cycle and putative mechanism(s) of injury 
frames the discussion of possible preventative and therapeutic strategies. 

-  The ongoing, unprecedented collective effort will, without a doubt, advance our ability to 

prevent the spread and optimally care for patients suffering from COVID-19.     

 
 
Summary 
The  coronavirus  disease-2019  (COVID-19),  a  contagious  disease  caused  by  severe  acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV2), has reached pandemic status.  As it spreads 
across the world, it has overwhelmed healthcare systems, strangled the global economy and led 
to  a  devastating  loss  of  life.    Widespread  efforts  from  regulators,  clinicians  and  scientists  are 
driving  a  rapid  expansion  of  knowledge  of  the  SARS-CoV2  virus  and  the  COVID-19  disease.  
We review the most current data with a focus on our basic understanding of the mechanism(s) of 
disease and translation to the clinical syndrome and potential therapeutics.  We discuss the basic 
virology, epidemiology, clinical manifestation, multi-organ consequences, and outcomes.  With a 
focus on cardiovascular complications, we propose several mechanisms of injury.  The virology 
and potential mechanism of injury form the basis for a discussion of potential disease-modifying 
therapies. 
   
Key words: COVID-19, SARS-CoV2, Cardiovascular, Virology, Treatments 
 
Abbreviations 
ACE2 – angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 
ARDS – acute respiratory distress syndrome 
CDC – Centers for Disease Control 
CFR – case fatality rate 
COVID-19 – coronavirus disease-2019 
CoV – coronavirus 
DIC – disseminated intravascular coagulation 
ER - endoplasmic reticulum 
hsCRP – high sensitivity c-reactive protein 
ICU – intensive care unit 
SARS-CoV1 or 2– severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-1 or -2 
SOFA – sequential organ failure assessment 
TMPSS2 – trasmembrane serine protease-2 
 

 

2 

 

 

Introduction 

The  coronavirus  disease-2019  (COVID-19),  a  contagious  disease  caused  by  severe  acute 

respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV2), has reached pandemic status.  As it spreads 

across the world, it has overwhelmed healthcare systems, strangled the global economy and led 

to  a  devastating  loss  of  life.    In  the  ongoing  wake  of  COVID-19,  the  world’s  medical  and 

scientific communities have come together to rapidly expand our knowledge of the pathogenesis, 

disease  manifestations  and  possible  preventive  and  therapeutic  strategies.    Virologists  have 

looked to related diseases to understand the life cycle of this novel viral infection.  Despite being 

overwhelmed,  through  conventional  and  historically  unconventional  mechanisms,  clinicians 

managing patients with COVID-19 have made a concerted effort to rapidly educate colleagues in 

expectant  regions  of  the  world  on  lessons  learned.    The  world’s  regulatory  agencies  and 

pharmaceutical  industry  are  using  emergency  mechanisms  to  expedite  access  to  and  study  of 

therapeutic  options.    These  widespread  efforts,  drawn  from  many  arenas,  are  driving  a  rapid 

expansion of collective experience and understanding of COVID-19.   

Here, we review this body of work with a focus on our basic understanding of the mechanism(s) 

of  disease  and  translation  to  the  clinical  syndrome  and  potential  therapeutic  options.  

Specifically, we discuss the basic virology, epidemiology and clinical manifestations, including 

presentation,  progression,  multi-organ  consequences  and  outcomes.    With  a  focus  on  the 

cardiovascular complications, we propose several potential mechanisms of injury.  We discuss a 

range  of  possible  therapeutic  options  in  the  context  of  the  viral  life  cycle  and  possible 

mechanisms of injury.  Finally, in recognition of the scale of this crisis,  we address the  ethical 

considerations around standards of care in the event of resource scarcity.   

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Basic Virology of SARS-CoV2 

Genetics and Structure 

Coronaviridae  comprise  a  family  of  enveloped,  single  stranded,  positive  sense,  RNA  viruses 

with  comparable  genomic  organization  and  functional  mechanisms.    Coronaviruses  (CoV)  are 

canonically  divided  into  alpha-  and  beta-,  gamma-  and  delta-  genera  predicated  on  genetic 

clustering.  The  alpha-  and  beta-CoV  are  known  to  cause  human  diseases,  such  as  common 

respiratory  infections.    The  SARS-CoV2  and  SARS-CoV1  are  beta-CoV  (1-3).  CoV  are  so-

named  because  of  the  characteristic  crown,  or  corona,  of  electron  density  that  they  exhibit  on 

transmission  electron  micrographs.  This  appearance  is  thought  to  be  caused  by  the  densely 

packed protein that studs the viral membrane and is responsible for receptor binding on target-

cell membranes. 

The  CoV  genome  is  organized  into  two  parts.  Highly  conserved  with  the  CoV  family,    the  5’ 

terminal end, encodes the replicase - the nonstructural proteins responsible for viral replication 

within  the  cell  (1-3).  It  is  translated  as  one  peptide  (~790  kDa)  from  which  the  constituent 

functional proteins are subsequently cleaved. CoV genomes encode 16 nonstructural proteins, as 

in SARS-CoV2, and they exhibit a multitude of functions required for viral replication  (2,4,5). 

Critical  proteins  for viral  replication include the main protease (nsp5), the papain-like protease 

(nsp3) and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (nsp12, RdRp). The other replicase constituent 

proteins repurpose the cellular machinery to facilitate viral replication and to blunt the intrinsic 

host immune functions (1,6).  

4 

The  remaining  third  of  the  CoV  genome  encodes  the  structural  proteins  and  a  variety  of 

accessory proteins (latter not discussed here).  The structural proteins are the constituent proteins 

of the transmissible viral particle, or virion. The key structural CoV proteins are the nucleocapsid 

protein (N) and three transmembrane proteins: the spike protein (S), the membrane protein (M), 

and the envelope protein (E) (1-5)(Figure 1).  The S protein is responsible for virus-cell receptor 

interactions (7-11)(Figure 1). The E and M proteins are responsible for membrane structure and 

fusion. The N protein binds viral RNA and mediates its interaction with the S, E, and M proteins 

for genome encapsulation (1,12).    

Life Cycle 

The  life  cycle  of  SARS-CoV2  has  not  been  rigorously  established;  however,  given  the 

considerable sequence homology, it is presumed to be similar to that of SARS-CoV1 and other 

CoV  (4,5).    In  general,  the  CoV  life  cycle  consists  of  a  series  of  steps  that  begins  with  viral 

binding to a target cell and culminates in viral reproduction.  Knowledge of this process informs 

an understanding of viral physiology and also will serve as the basis for discussion of antiviral 

therapeutics  (8)(Figure  1).  The  aim  of  evolving  therapeutics  will  be  to  break  the  “links  in  the 

chain” of the viral life cycle in order to forestall the propagation of infection within the cells of 

an individual patient. 

SARS-CoV2  is  known  to  bind  to  cells  via  the  same  receptor  as  SARS-CoV1,  the  membrane-

bound glycoprotein Angiotensin Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) (4). It has not been observed to 

bind  other  CoV  receptors,  namely  dipeptidyl  peptidase  4  (DPP4)  or  aminopeptidase  N  (APN) 

(4,13).    After  binding  of  ACE2,  the  virus  is  internalized  via  endocytosis  without  access  to  the 

5 

 

 

 

host intracellular compartment until a membrane fusion event occurs (4)(Figure 1). This process 

is  mediated,  at  least  in  part,  by  another  membrane  bound  protease  known  as  transmembrane 

serine  protease  2  (TMPRSS2),  which  cleaves  the  S  protein  as  a  necessary  step  of  membrane 

fusion (7). Interestingly, the protease activity of the CoV receptors, ACE2, DPP4 and APN, does 

not seem necessary for membrane fusion (14).  

Upon  membrane  fusion,  the  viral  RNA  genome  enters  the  intracellular  compartment.  At  this 

point, the viral RNA may be translated into its encoded structural and nonstructural proteins. The 

translation of the nonstructural proteins, or replicase, results in the production of a single massive 

polypeptide  chain,  from  which  the  sixteen  constituent  nonstructural  proteins  are  cleaved.  This 

process  is  initially  mediated  by  intracellular  proteases,  and  then  further  propagated  by  the 

function of the CoV main protease  and papain-like protease  (1). Another replicase protein, the 

RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) is responsible for the replication and amplification of 

the viral  genome (15).  During this process,  mutations may be  acquired  by errors in  replication 

and recombination events (1).   

Upon  amplification  of  the  viral  RNA,  more  viral  structural  and  nonstructural  proteins  may  be 

generated. Viral structural proteins, because of their transmembrane nature (with the exception of 

the N protein), are targeted to the ER membrane with appropriate signal sequences. Viral RNA, 

bound by N protein, interacts with the structural proteins on the membrane of the ER and Golgi 

apparatus  before  another  membrane  fusion  event  on  these  membranes  results  in  viral  budding 

and exocytosis (1,8,12).  

6 

 

 

 

 

Importantly, the precise molecular differences that account for the important clinical differences 

between  SARS-CoV2  and  SARS-CoV1  infections,  such  as  prolonged  latency,  widely  variable 

symptoms, a possible predisposition for individuals with pre-existing cardiovascular conditions, 

and a predilection for myocardial complications, remain unclear.  

Pathogenesis: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2  

SARS-CoV2, SARS-CoV, and HCoV-NL63, a virus that causes a mild respiratory infection, are 

all  known  to  employ  ACE2  as  a  receptor  (3,4,16,17).  Given  the  functions  of  ACE2  in  the 

cardiovascular  system,  the  importance  of  angiotensin-directed  pharmacology  in  cardiovascular 

disease  and  the  apparent  propensity  for  severe  illness  among  patients  with  COVID-19  with 

cardiovascular  comorbidity,  the  ACE2  molecule  has  been  the  subject  of  much  attention  (18). 

Indeed, major clinical societies have issued consensus statements on the use of ACE inhibitors 

(ACEi) and angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) in the setting of the COVID-19 pandemic, as 

discussed later (19). 

Angiotensin-Converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is a single-pass transmembrane protein with protease 

activity that cleaves the vasoconstrictor angiotensin  II into the vasodilator angiotensin 1-7 (20-

23).  In doing so,  it functions  as a counter-regulatory  enzyme to  the functions of ACE1, which 

generates angiotensin II (20).  In humans, the protein has a broad pattern of expression and has 

been found in  the lung  epithelium  (in particular the type  II pneumocyte),  the myocardium, the 

endothelium,  the  GI  tract,  bone  marrow,  kidneys  and  spleen  among  other  tissues;  potentially 

explaining  the  multi-organ  injury  observed  with  SARS-CoV2  infection  (24).  Another  relevant 

7 

 

 

 

feature of Ace2  gene expression is its encoding on the X chromosome, which may  account for 

possible sex differences observed in the epidemiology of COVID-19 (25).  

In animal models of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), due to chemical pneumonitis, 

overwhelming  sepsis,  endotoxemia,  or  influenza,  Ace2KO  mice  have  more  severe  acute  lung 

injury (ALI) relative to their wild-type counterparts as evaluated histologically and by measures 

of  elastance  (26-28).    The  phenotype  of  increased  elastance  was  rescued  by  administration  of 

recombinant  human  ACE2,  which  affirms  a  causal  link  between  Ace2  deficiency  and  a  more 

profound  state  of  ALI  (26,28).    Additionally,  the  administration  of  losartan,  an  angiotensin  II 

type-1 receptor (AT1R) blocker mitigated the exacerbating effects of SARS-CoV spike protein in 

an animal model of ARDS (29). Losartan also abrogated the severity of ALI due to influenza in 

mice (27,28).  

In regard to the counter-regulatory properties of ACE1 and ACE2, the effects of Ace2-deficiency 

appear to be rescued by Ace1-deficiency in mice. For example, the effects of Ace2-deficiency to 

result  in  more  severe  ALI  are  abrogated  by  Ace1-deficiency.  Ace2KO  mice  demonstrated  more 

severe  ALI  than  Ace2KO;Ace1+/-,  with  further  reduction  in  severity  observed  in  Ace2KO;Ace1-/- 

(26).  This  dose-responsiveness  also  implies  causation.  Comparable  effects  were  seen  with 

myocardial  dysfunction,  as  Ace2KO;Ace1+/-  and    Ace2KO;Ace1-/-  had  no  evidence  of  the 

contractile deficit observed in Ace2KO mice (30). Of note, in each of the above cases, however, 

the animal models were constitutive knockout systems (rather than lineage-specific or inducible 

knockout). Thus, the ACE2-expressing cell that  mediates each phenotypic abnormality  has not 

been determined. 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SARS-CoV2 is able to utilize ACE2 isoforms from swine, bats, civets and humans suggesting a 

mechanism whereby the virus may have been initially transmissible from species to species and, 

with  mutation,  evolved  into  a  novel  pathogen  (4).  Notably,  murine  ACE2  is  not  a  functional 

receptor for SARS-CoV2; thereby requiring transgenic expression of human ACE2 if mice are to 

be used as a research model (4).  

ACE2 undergoes cleavage by the membrane-bound protease ADAM17; resulting in the release 

of soluble ACE2 into the blood stream (31). The effects of soluble ACE2 are unclear in humans, 

however it appears to have favorable effects on lung function in models of ARDS, influenza, and 

RSV infection (26,28,32).  Soluble ACE2 has been studied in a phase II trial of ARDS, but large-

scale, well-powered clinical outcomes trials are needed (33). Research is ongoing to determine 

whether soluble ACE2 may act as a specific therapeutic to SARS-CoV2 in the role of a decoy 

receptor, as discussed later (34).  

Finally,  given  the  necessity  of  ACE2  for  viral  infection,  the  role  of  ACE  inhibitors  (ACEi)  or 

angiotensin  receptor  blockers  (ARBs)  in  COVID-19  has  drawn  intense  attention.  Importantly, 

the ACE2 enzyme itself is  not  inhibited by ACEi/ARB use  (21).  ACEi  or ARB exposure may 

result  in  ACE2  protein  upregulation  in  animal  models;  however  not  all  animal  models  exhibit 

this  effect.  The  existing  epidemiology  of  COVID-19  among  patients  taking  ACEi  or  ARB  is 

confounded  by  cardiovascular  comorbidities  which  may  alter  ACE2  and  angiotensin  II 

expression (18).  At this time, it is unclear if ACEi or ARBs use influences receptor expression 

and whether variable expression impacts the propensity for or severity of SARS-CoV2 infection.  

9 

 

Transmission 

Exposure to the Huanan seafood market  was common among the  earliest  cases contributing to 

the  SARS-CoV2  epidemic  in  China  suggesting  that  this  was  a  zoonotic  disease  with  an 

intermediate animal host (non-aquatic animals were sold in the market) (35).  Genomic analyses 

have  identified  approximately  87%  DNA  sequence  homology  between  SARS-CoV2  and  two 

SARS-like  CoV  isolated  from  Chinese  horseshoe  bats,  bat-SL-CoVZC45  and  bat-SL-

CoVZXC21, in the Zhejiang province in China (36). Notably, no bats are sold in the market and 

at the onset of the outbreak in December most bat species in Wuhan would be hibernating. Thus, 

similar  to  SARS-CoV1  and  MERS-CoV,  while  bats  may  be  the  natural  reservoir  for  SARS-

CoV2, there is likely an unidentified intermediate animal host responsible for animal-to-human 

transmission. Despite closure of the Huanan market on January 1, 2020, the epidemic continued 

to  expand  and  case  clusters  with  no  exposure  to  the  market  were  reported  indicating  the 

occurrence of human-to-human transmission (37). 

 

Akin  to  other  respiratory  viruses,  SARS-CoV2  spreads  primarily  through  small  respiratory 

droplets that are expelled from  infected individuals  and can travel  approximately 3-6 feet.  The 

virus  can  exist  in  nature  on  surfaces  and  can  last  for  up  to  4  hours  on  copper,  24  hours  on 

cardboard  and  up  to  72  hours  on  plastic  and  stainless  steel  surfaces  leading  to  fomite 

transmission (38). In fact, the Japanese National Institute of Infectious Disease reported detection 

of SARS-CoV2 RNA on surfaces in the cabins of symptomatic and asymptomatic passengers on 

the  Diamond  Princess  up  to  17  days  after  they  were  vacated    (39).  Live  virus  has  also  been 

isolated  and  cultured  from  fecal  specimens  raising  the  possibility  of  oro-fecal  transmission, 

 

10 

though corroborating clinical evidence for this method of transmission is lacking (40). Airborne 

transmission may be facilitated in healthcare settings where aerosol-producing interventions are 

being  performed  including  endotracheal  intubation,  bronchoscopy,  suctioning,  nebulizer 

treatment,  non-invasive  positive  pressure  ventilation  and  delivery  of  oxygen  via  a  high-flow 

nasal  cannula.  These  transmission  data  support  the  clinical  recommendations  that  airborne 

precautions,  including  use  of  N-95  masks,  should  be  implemented  in  these  aerosol-producing 

settings  whereas  standard  droplet  precautions  should  be  used  during  all  other  encounters  with 

infected individuals (41). 

 

In a fully susceptible population, reflected by early stages of the epidemic in China, studies have 

estimated a basic reproductive number (Ro) of 2.38 for SARS-CoV2, meaning that every infected 

individual is likely on average to spread the virus to 2 to 3 other individuals (42). An outbreak 

will continue to increase in size if the Ro>1. For context, seasonal influenza has an Ro of 1.5 (43). 

Substantial transmission from asymptomatic hosts has facilitated the widespread transmission of 

SARS-CoV2  and  contributed  to  its  pandemic  potential  (42).  A  study  from  Singapore  with 

extensive contact  tracing identified 7 clusters of cases where secondary spread of the infection 

occurred 1-3 days prior to symptom development in the source patient (44). Thus, containment 

measures aimed solely at isolating symptomatic individuals are inadequate. Furthermore, contact 

tracing  efforts  should 

take 

in 

to  account 

the  pre-symptomatic  contagious  period 

to 

comprehensively  capture  all  potentially  exposed  individuals.  Ro  is  not  a  static  measure  and 

interventions including self-quarantine, contact isolation, social distancing and enhanced hygiene 

measures have proven to be effective in China. Following implementation of such measures in 

 

11 

China,  the  Ro  steadily  decreased  from  2.38  prior  to  January  23rd  to  0.99  during  the  period  of 

January 24-February 8, 2020 (42). 

Epidemiology and Clinical Manifestations of SARS-CoV2 

Epidemiology 

The burden of the SARS-CoV2 virus has evolved rapidly since it first appeared in Wuhan, China 

in December 2019. What began as a few case reports of atypical pneumonia now spans the globe 

as  a  pandemic.  At  present,  most  published  data  come  from  China  and  form  the  basis  for  our 

understanding of the epidemiology of COVID-19.   In the largest published registry to date, the 

Chinese Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported high-level details for patient 

characteristics,  severity  of  manifestations  and  survival  in  72,314  cases  of  putative  (47%)  and 

confirmed (63%) COVID-19 (45).  In this population, predominantly identified by the presence 

of  symptoms  (~99%),  <2%  of  cases  occurred  in  children  <  19  years  of  age  suggesting  that 

children either are either resistant to infection or rarely symptomatic.  Of confirmed cases, most 

(87%) were mild, defined by no or mild pneumonia, 14% were severe with significant infiltrates 

or signs of respiratory compromise and 5% were critical with respiratory failure (e.g. mechanical 

ventilation), shock or multiorgan system failure.   

The first confirmed case of COVID-19 in the US was identified on January 20, 2020 and the US 

has now surpassed all other countries in the absolute number of cases.  However, given the rapid 

and  recent  onset  of  the  burden,  there  are  few  published  data  reflecting  the  experience  with 

COVID-19 in the US.   In an early snap shot from the US CDC in 4,226 confirmed cases with 

symptoms or exposure, only 5% occurred in those under the age of 20 (46).   

12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

While data are rapidly accumulating, much of the epidemiology of this virus remains unknown. 

Most  publications  are  small,  single  center  studies,  and  detail  the  clinical  characteristics, 

complications and outcomes in the subset of patients who were hospitalized.  As a result of the 

limitations  on  testing  and  the  data  suggesting  that  many  infected  individuals  may  be 

asymptomatic, the true burden of infected individuals is unclear and underestimated (42,47).  Not 

only does  the variable manifestation of symptoms hamper public health initiatives to  trace and 

isolate  infected  individuals,  but  also  it  limits  our  ability  to  accurately  estimate  infectivity, 

symptom burden, and non-fatal and fatal complication rates in the overall population of infected 

individuals.  With that caveat, the published data provide insights into the more vulnerable, at-

risk  populations  who  require  hospitalization.    While  the  individual  studies  are  small,  the 

predictors  of  more  severe  manifestations  and  poor  outcomes  have  been  generally  consistent  as 

detailed below. 

Clinical Presentation / Syndrome 

In  a  multi-center  case  series  of  1,099  hospitalized  patients  from  China,  the  most  common 

symptoms  were  fever  in  up  to  90%,  followed  by  cough,  fatigue,  sputum  production,  and 

shortness  of  breath  (48).    Less  common  symptoms  included  headache,  myalgias,  sore  throat, 

nausea,  vomiting,  and  diarrhea.    The  American  Association  of  Otolaryngology  has  recently 

highlighted anosmia and dysgeusia as possible symptoms of disease as well  (49). The median 

incubation period, or time from probable exposure to first symptom, was 4 days (IQR 2-7) (48).  

Another  report  detailed  that  99%  of  infected  patients  develop  symptoms  within  14  days  (50).  

Common lab derangements on admission included lymphopenia, elevations in c-reactive protein, 

13 

lactate dehydrogenase, liver transaminases and d-dimer (48).  Notably, procalcitonin was rarely 

elevated  (48).    These  data  are  generally  consistent  across  multiple  smaller  studies,  several  of 

which noted elevations in other inflammatory markers, such as  IL-6,  ferritin  and ESR  (51-55).  

Evidence of cardiac or kidney injury at admission was variable across studies, but tended to be 

absent upon hospitalization (48,51-53,56). Chest computed tomography at the time of admission 

was  abnormal  in  87%  of  patients  with  ground  glass  opacities  or  local  or  patchy  “shadowing” 

(48).   

 

Disease Progression 

Many  of  the  more  severe  manifestations,  such  as  ARDS,  acute  kidney  injury  (AKI)  and 

myocardial injury, tend to occur as many as 8-14 days after the onset of symptoms and portend 

worse outcomes  (53). Within  a hospitalized population,  rates of  ICU  admission range between 

26-32%  across  most  studies  (35,48,51-53,57).  Several  studies  have  identified  older  age  and 

baseline burden of comorbidity, such as diabetes, hypertension, prior coronary disease and prior 

lung  disease,  as  predictors  of  more  significant  disease  progression  with  higher  rates  of  ARDS, 

AKI,  cardiac  injury,  ICU  admission  and  death  (51-53,58,59).  Increases  in  markers  of 

inflammation,  coagulation,  and  cardiac  injury  also  correlate  with  disease  severity  and  rise 

throughout the course of the disease (53,54,56).   In hospitalized populations, the timing of death 

occurred at a median of 16-19 days after illness onset (53,58).  The median time from symptom 

onset to discharge in survivors was around 3 weeks (53).  

Non-Cardiovascular Clinical Manifestations 

Respiratory Failure 

 

 

14 

The most prominent complication of COVID-19 is respiratory failure. As previously described, 

the  majority  of  patients  have  no  or  mild  symptoms  (45).    In  hospitalized  patients,  respiratory 

symptoms  are  common  and  range  in  severity  from  cough  (60-80%)  or  dyspnea  (19-40%)  to 

ARDS (17-42%) (51-53,56,57).  ARDS rates were only 3.2% in the largest case series, but this 

may be an underestimate due to a short average follow up time of 12 days, with the vast majority 

of patients remaining hospitalized at the end of study (48).   ARDS tends to occur ~1-2 weeks 

into illness and is  often precipitous  and protracted  (51,53,57).  For these reasons,  and to  avoid 

risk  of  provider  infection  with  emergent  intubation,  professional  societies  recommend  early 

intubation  in  the  event  of  respiratory  decline  (41).    Intubation  was  required  in  10-33%  in  the 

various Chinese series; however, rates of high-flow nasal cannula and non-invasive mechanical 

ventilation  also  were  high  (35,51-53).   These  therapies  are  believed  to  result  in  aerosolization 

and are generally not recommended – consequently, more patients will be intubated when unable 

to  be  supported  by  nasal  cannula  or  a  non-rebreather  mask  (41).      Older  age,  baseline 

hypertension,  diabetes,  high  fever,  lymphopenia,  injury  to  other  organs  (e.g.  AKI,  ALI),  and 

elevated  d-dimer  and  inflammatory  markers  were  predictors  of  ARDS;  advanced  age, 

neutropenia,  elevated  d-dimer  and  inflammation  are  associated  with  higher  mortality  in  those 

with ARDS (51). Development of ARDS, along with acute cardiac injury, was an independent 

predictor of death (56).  Importantly, hypoxemic respiratory failure is the leading cause of death 

in COVID-19, contributing to 60% of deaths (58).  

Renal injury 

 

 

Estimates  vary  as  to  the  incidence  of  acute  kidney  injury  in  COVID-19,  ranging  between  0.5-

15%  (35,48,52,53,56,59).  Among  hospitalized  patients  the  rates  of  proteinuria  (43.9%)  and 

15 

hematuria  (26.7%)   appear  to  be  even  higher  (59).  Acute  kidney  injury  occurs  in  the  first  few 

days  after  admission  in  patients  with  baseline  chronic  kidney  disease,  and  after  7-10  days  in 

patients  with  normal  baseline  renal  function  (59).  Mechanisms  of  renal  injury  have  been 

hypothesized to include both acute tubular necrosis (ATN), direct cytotoxic effects of the virus 

itself, and immune-mediated damage (59).  

Liver injury 

Transaminitis is common with an incidence of 21-37%, and as high as 48-62% of patients who 

are  critically  ill  or  who  do  not  survive  (35,48,53).  Acute  liver  injury,  defined  as  either  alanine 

aminotransferase  or  aspartate  aminotransferase  greater  than  three  times  the  upper  limit  of 

normal,  occurs  less  frequently,  and  was  reported  to  occur  in  19.1%  (n=4)  of  21  patients  who 

were admitted to an ICU in Washington State (55).  

Cardiovascular Manifestations 

Cardiac injury 

Numerous studies have reported acute cardiac injury as an important manifestation of COVID-

19.    In  studies  published  to  date,  acute  cardiac  injury  was  variably  defined  as  either  cardiac 

troponin  elevation  >99th  percentile  alone  or  a  composite  of  troponin  elevation,  ECG  or 

echocardiographic abnormalities (52-56,58).  Importantly, many aspects of this endpoint remain 

undefined  including  the  frequency  and  severity  of  associated  structural  abnormalities.    The 

reported rate of cardiac injury varies between studies, from 7% to 28% of hospitalized patients, a 

number which is likely partially dependent upon the definition used and the severity of cases at 

the  hospital  from  which  the  data  was  drawn  (52-54,56).      Notably,  patients  with  evidence  of 

16 

 

 

 

cardiac  injury  tend  to  be  older  with  more  comorbidities,  including  baseline  hypertension, 

diabetes,  coronary  heart  disease,  and  heart  failure  (54,56).  Across  all  studies,  cardiac  injury  is 

associated with worse outcomes, including ICU admission and death (52-54,56).  Based on serial 

assessment of troponin, researchers in China reported that the median time to the development of 

acute  cardiac  injury  was  15  days  (IQR  10  -17)  after  illness  onset,  occurring  after  the 

development of ARDS (53).  Of note, early cardiac injury has been reported, even in the absence 

of  respiratory  symptoms  (60).    In  a  case  series  by  Shi  et  al,  the  mortality  rate  for  those 

hospitalized  with  subsequent  evidence  of  cardiac  injury  was  significantly  higher  than  those 

without  cardiac  injury  (51.2%  vs  4.5%,  p<0.001)  and,  along  with  ARDS,  was  an  independent 

predictor of death (56). The magnitude of troponin elevation correlates modestly with the degree 

of hsCRP elevation (54).  Dynamic increases in troponin were associated with a higher mortality 

rate  (54,61).    Importantly,  the  mechanism  of  cardiac  injury  may  be  multifactorial,  including 

demand-ischemia,  toxicity  from  direct  viral  injury,  stress,  inflammation,  microvascular 

dysfunction or plaque rupture, as discussed later (Central Illustration).    

Arrhythmia 

Arrhythmias  have  been  noted  in  several  published  reports.  In  a  case  series  of  138  hospitalized 

patients  with  COVID-19,  16.7%  (n=23)  developed  an  unspecified  arrhythmia  during  their 

hospitalization (52); higher rates were noted among patients admitted to the ICU (44.4%, n=16). 

A  case  series  of  187  hospitalized  patients  provided  insight  into  specific  arrhythmias,  reporting 

sustained ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation amongst 5.9% (n=11) of the patients 

(54).  These  findings  are  consistent  with  arrhythmias  documented  in  influenza,  which  has  been 

known to cause both AV node dysfunction and ventricular arrhythmias (62).  

17 

 

 

 

 

 

Heart failure, cardiogenic shock and myocarditis 

Heart failure and myocardial dysfunction have been described in COVID-19 (53,55,58,60,63). In 

a  case  series  of  191  patients,  heart  failure  was  noted  as  a  complication  of  COVID-19  in  23% 

(n=44)  of  all  patients  and  among  52%  (n=28)  of  non-survivors,  though  the  definition  of  heart 

failure  was  not  clearly  detailed  (53).  A  smaller  series  of  21  elderly,  critically-ill  patients  in 

Washington  State  reported  incident  systolic  dysfunction  and  cardiogenic  shock  in  7  patients 

(33%).(55)   Outside  of  this  series,  the  incidence  of  cardiogenic  shock  has  not  been  reported.  

Two case reports have documented cardiogenic shock in the setting of an elevated troponin, ST 

elevations, a reduction in left ventricular systolic function and no obstructive coronary disease in 

patients  with  COVID-19.(60,63)   One  report  confirmed  fulminant  myocarditis  by  cardiac 

MRI.(60)  Neither patient underwent endomyocardial biopsy.  Both were treated with inotropes 

and steroids with recovery of LV function.  The potential etiologies of the clinical myocarditis 

are discussed in  detail  below (Central  Illustration).   In one case series from  China, myocardial 

damage  or  heart  failure  contributed  to  40%  of  deaths  overall  with  7%  attributed  to  solely  to 

circulatory failure without respiratory failure.(58) 

Thrombosis 

One  of  the  prominent  findings  replicated  across  most  early  studies  of  COVID-19  includes 

disarray  of  the  coagulation  and  fibrinolytic  system.    Hospitalized  patients  with  moderate  and 

severe  COVID-19  and  those  with  poorer  outcomes  are  noted  to  have  prolonged  prothrombin 

time (PT), elevated D-dimer, and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT).(35,53,54,64)  In 

the context of a clinical picture that is consistent with disseminated intravascular thrombosis, it is 

18 

reasonable  to  speculate  that  COVID-19  would  be  associated  with  venous  or  arterial  thrombi, 

however  the  incidence  has  not  been  published.  A  pathology  report  from  SARS-CoV1 

demonstrated fibrin thrombi in 17 of 20 patients examined with 12 of them showing pulmonary 

infarcts (65). One preliminary case report, which has not been peer-reviewed, from a COVID-19 

patient  described  autopsy  findings  of  microthrombi  in  the  pulmonary  vasculature  (66).    While 

empiric  anticoagulation  is  being  used  in  some  centers  (Personal  communication  Lorenzo 

Grazioli,  Papa  Giovanni  XXIII  hospital  in  Bergamo,  Italy),  the  absence  of  published  data 

documenting 

thrombotic  events 

in  COVID-19,  routine  use  of  anticoagulation 

is  not 

recommended without evidence a thrombotic indication (67).  

Mortality 

COVID-19 has a lower estimated case fatality rate (CFR) than its predecessors, SARS-CoV1 and 

MERS-CoV  which  were  9.4%  and  34.4%,  respectively  (68).   However,  given  the  high  global 

burden of infection seen in COVID-19 compared to SARS and MERS, the absolute number of 

fatalities  is  staggeringly  high,  crossing  70,000  fatalities  at  the  time  of  this  review  (69).    CFR 

estimates  have  been  challenging  with  SARS-CoV2,  as  populations  have  not  been  widely 

screened  for  infection  –  leading  to  an  underestimate  of  the  denominator  and  probable 

overestimate of the CFR.  Crude, unadjusted estimates for the global CFR are ~5%  at the time 

writing  with  notable  variation  by  country:  Italy  11.9%  (13,155  deaths),  Spain  9.0%  (9,387 

deaths),  South  Korea  1.7%  (169  deaths),  China  4.1%  (3312  deaths),  Iran  6.4%  (3036  deaths), 

Germany  1.2%  (931  deaths)  and  the  United  States  2.3%  (5,137  deaths)  (69).    Regional  and 

national differences in CFR may be a result of multiple factors, including a) variable testing of 

the general and asymptomatic/mildly symptomatic population, b) differing age across countries, 

19 

 

 

c) variable health care system  resources and preparedness as well as d) widely different public 

health  measures  for  virus  control.    Importantly,  as  healthcare  capacity  is  exceeded,  a  large 

number  of  deaths  may  occur  because  of  limited  availability  of  critical  care  resources,  such  as 

mechanical ventilation.  When adjusted for underlying demography and under-ascertainment of 

cases, the CFR rate was estimated to be 1.4% in China.(70) 

The  general  pattern  of  fatalities  across  the  age  groups  appears  to  be  consistent  throughout  the 

world. In general, greater age is associated with greater risk of severe disease as well as death. 

According to the Chinese CDC report of over 70,000 cases, the age-related CFR was as follows: 

<1% in age <50 years, 1.3% in age 50-59 years, 3.6% in age 60-69 years, 8% in age 70-79 years, 

and 14.8% in age 80 years and greater (45). This steep increase in age-related mortality was also 

observed  in  Italy,  the  US  and  South  Korea  (46,71,72).    In  fact,  age,  along  with  markers  of 

disease severity (d-dimer and sequential organ failure assessment [SOFA] score) were the only 

independent predictors of mortality in one study (53).   

Multiple  associations  have  been  reported  between  baseline  characteristics  and  comorbid 

conditions with mortality in COVID-19. In univariate analyses of predictors of death, Zhou and 

colleagues  reported  that  age,  coronary  heart  disease,  diabetes,  hypertension,  respiratory  rate, 

SOFA  score,  elevated  WBC,  lymphocyte  count,  creatinine,  lactate  dehydrogenase,  high 

sensitivity  troponin  I,  D-dimer,  and  elevated  inflammatory  markers  such  as  ferritin,  IL-6  and 

procalcitonin  were  associated  with  death  (53).    However,  in  multivariable  modeling  only  age 

(OR 1·10 [95% CI 1·03–1·17] per year increase), SOFA score (OR 5.7 [95% CI 2.6-12.2]) and 

elevated  D-dimer (18.4 [95% CI 2.6  - 128.6]) remained independent  predictors of mortality  as 

20 

 

 

 

described  above  (53).  In  another  multivariate  analysis  of  416  patients  from  Wuhan,  after 

controlling  for  age,  baseline  cardiovascular,  pulmonary,  and  renal  disease,  only  presence  of 

cardiac injury and development of ARDS were significantly associated with mortality (4.3 [95% 

CI,  1.9-9.5]  and  7.9  [95%  CI,  3.7-16.7],  respectively).(56)      It  should  be  noted,  however,  that 

both of these complications tend to occur in older individuals.(56,73)    

Putative Mechanisms of Cardiovascular Manifestations in SARS-CoV2 

As  mentioned  in  prior  sections,  COVID-19  patients  present  with  highly  variable  acuities  of 

disease and disease progression. Cardiac injury is a common feature of the disease process, and 

40% of patients die with myocardial injury as a proximate finding (58). While multiple therapies 

are currently under development and in trials for treatment of COVID-19, as discussed in a later 

section, understanding the mechanism(s) of cardiac disease will be vital to effective and timely 

targeted  treatment  of  this  syndrome  and  its  devastating  sequelae.  Here  we  propose  several 

putative mechanisms of COVID-19-induced cardiovascular disease (Central Illustration). 

Direct viral myocardial injury 

The  presence  of  ACE2  receptors  on  the  myocardium  and  vascular  endothelial  cells  provides  a 

theoretical mechanism for direct viral infection of the heart with resultant myocarditis.  Reports 

have  documented  clear  cases  of  myocarditis  syndromes  (60,63).    However,  to  date  there  no 

reports  of  biopsy  proven  SARS-CoV2  viral  myocarditis  with  viral  inclusions  or  viral  DNA 

detected in myocardial tissue. The closely related SARS-CoV1 has been documented to cause a 

viral myocarditis with detection of viral RNA in autopsied hearts (74,75).  In light of the shared 

21 

 

 

 

host  cell  entry  receptor  between  SARS-CoV2  and  CoV1,  a  direct  viral  myocardial  entry  and 

resulting injury is plausible with SARS-CoV2 as well (76).  

Another  hypothesized  mechanism  of  direct  viral  injury  to  the  myocardium  is  through  an 

infection-mediated  vasculitis.  The  ACE2  receptor  is  highly  expressed  in  arterial  and  venous 

endothelial  cells  (24).  There  are  pathologic  data  from  SARS-CoV1  showing  evidence  of 

vasculitis with monocyte and lymphocyte infiltration, vascular endothelial cell injury and stromal 

edema in the heart (77). Either direct viral entry into myocardial endothelial cells could trigger a 

vasculitis  or  presence  of  virus  could  lead  to  an  indirect  immunological  response  and  resulting 

hypersensitivity  reaction  (78,79).  This  insult  would  be  associated  with  myocardial  injury  and 

perhaps even overt myocardial dysfunction in COVID-19. 

Microvascular injury 

Micro- and macro-thromboses were observed in autopsy evaluations of 3 patients who died from 

SARS-CoV1  (80).        A  prominent  finding  of  SARS-CoV2  is  disarray  of  the  coagulation  and 

fibrinolytic  system,  with  >70%  of  non-survivors  meeting  criteria  for  DIC  (81).    It  may  be 

hypothesized  that  myocardial  injury  is  a  result  of  microthrombus  formation  in  the  myocardial 

vasculature in the setting of a hypercoagulable state like DIC.   

Infections and sepsis are a leading cause of DIC in general (82). The exact mechanism of DIC in 

the setting of sepsis and ARDS is complex, but is generally thought to be related to an immune-

mediated  exhaustion  of  the  coagulation  and  fibrinolytic  systems  promoting  bleeding  and 

thrombosis in the same patient (83).  Endothelial injury and inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-

22 

 

 

 

 

6  and  TNF-alpha,  upregulate  tissue  factor  expression,  driving  a  pro-thombotic  state  (84-87).   

Dysregulation of antithrombin III, plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) and protein C 

in  the  setting  of  significant  inflammation  and  sepsis  promote  an  anti-coagulated  state  (88-90). 

Furthermore,  platelet  activation  also  ensues  in  the  context  of  sepsis  and  inflammation,  further 

tipping the fine balance of the coagulation system (91-94).  In summary, the hyperinflammation 

and  immune  activation  seen  in  severe  COVID-19  infection  is  likely  sufficient  to  trigger  DIC, 

microvascular dysfunction and myocardial injury.   

Stress cardiomyopathy 

The role of stress (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy in COVID-19 related cardiac injury is not known 

at  this  time,  with  no  cases  in  the  literature  currently.  However,  several  of  the  proposed 

mechanisms  of  COVID-19  related  cardiac  injury  detailed  in  this  review  are  also  thought  to  be 

implicated in the pathophysiology of stress cardiomyopathy, particularly those of microvascular 

dysfunction, cytokine storm and sympathetic surge (95). 

Acute coronary syndrome 

Any discussion of myocardial injury would be incomplete without addressing the issue of acute 

coronary  syndrome  (ACS)  and  myocardial  infarction  (MI).  The  current  published  experience 

does not detail the incidence of ACS or epicardial plaque rupture as a mechanism for the acute 

cardiac injury observed in COVID-19. However, there is historical precedent for an association 

between  infection  and  an  elevated  risk  of  ACS.  Epidemiologic  studies  have  shown  that 

hospitalization  for  pneumonia  is  associated  with  a  higher  risk  for  atherosclerotic  events  (96). 

Influenza  infection  has  been  well  studied  and  shown  to  have  a  temporal  association  with 

23 

 

 

 

cardiovascular complications and acute coronary syndrome (97,98). Annual vaccination against 

seasonal influenza was associated with a 36% lower rate of major adverse cardiovascular events 

in  a  meta-analysis  of  clinical  trials  evaluating  this  question  (97).    Therefore,  viral  infection  is 

associated with an increased risk for coronary events and prevention with a reduction in this risk.  

Therefore,  it  is  plausible  that  ACS  will  also  be  an  important  cause  of  acute  cardiac  injury  in 

patients  with  COVID-19.      Accordingly,  international  societies  have  devised  pathways  and 

protocols to effectively treat COVID-19 patients with ACS, including appropriate and timely use 

of  resources  to  ensure  the  best  outcome  for  the  patient  while  also  maintaining  provider  safety 

(99).  

 

There are multiple pathophysiologic mechanisms by which systemic viral infection (by influenza 

or SARS-CoV2, for example) may lead to a higher risk of plaque destabilization and ACS (100). 

The  role  of  inflammation  in  the  development  and  progression  of  atherosclerosis  is  well 

established (101,102). The immune response to acute viral infection and the accompanying surge 

of  cytokines  and  inflammatory  mediators  can  lead  to  localized  arterial  inflammation  which  is 

more  pronounced  within  coronary  plaques  (61,103).  Entry  of  viral  products  into  the  systemic 

circulation,  also  known  as  pathogen-associated  molecular  patterns  (PAMPs),  can  cause  innate 

immune receptor activation which can cascade into activation of immune cells resident in  pre-

existing atheromata driving plaque rupture.(104) Viral PAMPs are also believed to activate the 

inflammasome,  resulting  in  conversion  of  pro-cytokines  into  the  biologically  active  cytokines 

(105).    In  addition,  dysregulation  of  coronary  vascular  endothelial  function  by  infection  and 

inflammation may lead to a more vasoconstricted coronary bed (106). All of these changes are 

 

24 

putative mechanisms by which COVID-19 infection could lead to destabilization of pre-existing 

atherosclerotic plaque driving an acute coronary event. 

Myocardial injury secondary to oxygen supply and demand mismatch 

Periods  of  severe  physiologic  stress  in  the  setting  of  sepsis  and  respiratory  failure  can  be 

associated  with  elevations  in  biomarkers  of  myocardial  injury  and  strain  in  some  patients,  an 

entity  that  confers  poorer  prognosis.(107-109)  The  mechanism  of  such  myocardial  injury  is 

thought  to  be  related  to  a  mismatch  between  oxygen  supply  and  demand,  without  acute 

atherothrombotic  plaque  disruption,  and  consistent  with  a  diagnosis  of    type  2  myocardial 

infarction  (MI)  (100,110).  Indeed,  patients  who  suffer  from  type  2  MI  compared  to  type  1  MI 

have  higher  mortality  rates,  which  may  in  part  be  explained  by  a  higher  burden  of  acute  and 

chronic comorbid conditions in the type 2 MI population (111).  Furthermore, type 2 MI on the 

background of coronary artery disease (CAD) has a worse prognosis than those patients without 

CAD. Given the age and comorbidity profile of patients hospitalized with severe COVID-19, it is 

reasonable to assume that this population has a higher risk of underlying non-obstructive CAD, 

and therefore the presence of type 2 MI in this population is likely a marker of and contributor to 

the poor outcomes of COVID-19 patients with troponin elevations (56). 

Systemic hyperinflammatory response with resulting myocardial injury 

Perhaps one of the more intriguing mechanisms for cardiac injury in severe COVID-19 patients 

stems  from  the  significant  systemic  inflammatory  response.  Early  reports  have  demonstrated 

severely  elevated  levels  of  inflammatory  biomarkers  and  cytokines,  including  IL-6,  C-reactive 

protein  (CRP),  tumor  necrosis  factor  (TNF)-α,  interleukin  (IL)-2R  and  ferritin  (112).  Higher 

25 

 

 

 

levels of these biomarkers are associated with more severe COVID-19 manifestations and worse 

outcomes.  A proposed theoretical  model of COVID-19 disease progression  divides the course 

into three overlapping yet distinct stages. In this staging framework, stage I represents early viral 

infection  with  associated  constitutional  symptoms.  In  stage  II,  direct  viral  cytotoxicity  of  the 

pulmonary system with associated inflammatory activation leads to prominent respiratory system 

compromise,  associated  with  dyspnea  and  ultimately  acute  respiratory  distress  syndrome 

(ARDS) and hypoxia. With ACE2 receptors serving as an entry-point for viral replication in type 

II pneumocytes, the pulmonary system becomes the maiden organ of injury. If the host is unable 

to  clear  the  virus  via  a  productive  and  protective  immune  response,  COVID-19  progresses  to 

stage  III  -  a  hyperinflammatory  state  associated  with  profound  elevations  in  inflammatory 

biomarkers. Patients who reach stage III have severe COVID-19 manifestations with multiorgan 

dysfunction and cytokine storm, with immune dysregulating akin to that seen in cytokine release 

syndrome  (CRS)  associated  with  chimeric  antigen  receptor  T-cell  (CAR-T)  therapy  (112-116).  

This  observation  is  basis  for  several  investigational  therapies  in  COVID-19,  including  steroids 

and anti-inflammatory agents, as discussed later.  

Prior  studies  have  shown  that  cardiomyopathy  in  sepsis  is  partially  mediated  by  inflammatory 

cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, INF-γ and IL-2 (73). Recombinant TNF-α resulted in an 

early  and  sustained  LV  systolic  dysfunction  in  canines  (117).  Cultured  rat  cardiomyocytes 

demonstrated reduced contractility when exposed to IL-6 (118). The mechanism may be through 

modulation  of  calcium  channel  activity  with  resultant  myocardial  dysfunction  (119-121). 

Additionally,  nitric  oxide  (NO)  is  also  believed  to  be  a  mediator  of  myocardial  depression  in 

hyperinflammatory states such as sepsis. Seminal studies found that medium from LPS-activated 

26 

 

 

macrophages  suppressed  myocyte  contractility,  a  finding  reversed  with  the  NO  synthase 

inhibitor,  L-N-monomethyl  arginine  (122).    Finally,  recent  understanding  of  the  key  role  of 

mitochondrial  dysfunction  in  septic  states  has  raised  questions  about  the  role  of  this  entity  in 

sepsis  associated  cardiomyopathy  (123).  Indeed,  similar  mechanisms  are  thought  to  possibly 

underly the pathophysiology of stress (Takotsubo) cardiomyopathy as well.   

Potential Targeted or Disease Modifying Treatments in SARS CoV2              

The  preceding  review  of  the  viral  physiology  of  SARS-CoV2  and  the  various  potential 

mechanisms of injury to the host,  serve as the basis for considering specific targeted treatment 

and  prevention.    The  following  section  outlines  several  current  candidate  classes  of  agents, 

including a brief discussion of vaccine development (Figure 1).   

Nucleotide Analogs - Inhibitors of Viral Genome Replication 

The  antiviral  mechanism  of  nucleotide  analogs  is  to  interfere  with  RdRp  function  and  viral 

genome  replication  and  amplification  (Figure  1).  There  are  no  CoV-specific  drugs  available  at 

this time and so ongoing efforts to employ this drug class against SARS-CoV2 are reliant on pre-

existing agents designed for other viral illnesses (124).  

The  most  widely-applied  agent  in  this  class  against  SARS-CoV2  has  been  remdesivir  (125). 

Remdesivir functions as a chain terminator of RNA replication, initially designed for use against 

Ebola  (124).   Addition  of  remdesivir  to  the  growing  RNA  strand  by  RdRp  blocks  the 

incorporation of additional nucleotides, thereby halting genome replication (126,127).  The agent 

has  been  shown  to  have  in  vitro  activity  against  SARS-CoV2,  leading  to  off-label  and 

27 

 

 

 

 

investigational use around the world (4,125). Multiple randomized-controlled trials are ongoing 

in  China  and  the  United  States  for  moderate,  severe  and  critical  COVID-19  (NCT04292730, 

NCT04292899, NCT04252664, NCT04252664, NCT04292730). 

Another nucleotide analog for the disruption of RdRp-dependent viral replication is favipiravir, 

which  has  investigational  approval  in  several  countries  (128,129).  Additional  agents  that  are 

under study include emtricitabine/tenofovir and ribavirin (128,130). 

 

Protease Inhibitors - Inhibitors of Nonstructural Protein Generation 

The antiviral mechanism of action of protease inhibitors is to block viral proteases which cleave 

the non-structural proteins from the large, monomeric, replicase as detailed above (Figure 1).  As 

the maturation of non-structural proteins, such as RdRp, is necessary for viral reproduction, the 

pharmacologic impairment of the protease should be effective to stop viral replication.  

A randomized control trial of lopinavir-ritonavir, a combination protease inhibitor designed for 

HIV  treatment,  in  199  patients  with  at  least  moderate  COVID-19  did  not  significantly  alter 

clinical  improvement  or  viral  clearance  (131).  While  the  results  of  this  trial  were  met  with 

disappointment, this negative study should not forestall trials and drug development of protease 

inhibitors  as  a  therapeutic  class,  given  that  this  drug  was  not  specifically  designed  for  SARS-

CoV2 (128).  

Indeed, the development of inhibitors specific to SARS-CoV2 main protease is underway. A 

class of agents identified using structure-based drug design, α-ketonamide inhibitors, has 

demonstrated in vitro efficacy and favorable pharmacokinetics (132). Other candidate protease 

28 

 

 

 

inhibitors for SARS-CoV2 include danoprevir, a drug originally intended for HCV therapy 

(133). 

Inhibitors of Membrane Fusion  

In order for the viral  genome to  gain  access  to  cellular machinery for replication, a membrane 

fusion event must occur between the viral and endosomal membranes, which are noncovalently 

bound by the interaction between the S protein and ACE2. The exact mechanism of membrane 

fusion is unknown but appears to be dependent on endosomal maturation and a membrane-bound 

host protease, TMPRSS2 (7).  

Chloroquine (CQ) / Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) 

The antiviral properties of chloroquine (CQ) were previously observed in HIV and other viruses 

(134,135).  CQ  and  HCQ  are  thought  to  inhibit  endosomal  maturation,  a  process  by  which 

endosomes are translocated from the perimembrane regions of the cell to central hubs (136,137) 

(Figure  1).   CQ  prevented  viral  replication  of  SARS-CoV1  in  vitro  (138).  A  follow-up  study 

demonstrated  comparable  efficacy  of  HCQ,  a  less  toxic  derivative,  and  suggested  that  the 

mechanism of impaired endosomal maturation indeed applied to SARS-CoV2 infection in vitro 

(139). Only poor-quality, non-randomized, unblinded data exists assessing the benefit of HCQ in 

COVID-19  (140).   While  HCQ  is  being  widely  used  with  an  FDA  emergency  authorization , 

more data are needed to prove efficacy against SARS-CoV2 in humans.  Notably, CQ and HCQ 

prolong the QT and may induce arrhythmia; significant caution should be used in starting these 

agents in patients with a QTc>500 ms.   Concomitant use of other QT prolonging agents is not 

recommended.   

29 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Camostat  

Camostat  is  a  protease  inhibitor  approved  for  the  treatment  of  chronic  pancreatitis.  Camostat 

appears to inhibit TMPRSS2 in proteomic and in vitro studies (7,141). A randomized, placebo-

controlled trial is underway for this agent in COVID-19 (NCT04321096) (Figure 1). 

Neutralizing Antibodies and Decoy Proteins 

Neutralizing antibodies are designed to bind virions, preventing viral exposure or binding to host 

cells (Figure 1).  Plasma from patients who have recovered from SARS-CoV2 may contain anti-

SARS-CoV2 IgG antibodies.  In a small, single-arm trial of convalescent plasma in COVID-19 

patients with ARDS, all had clinical improvement with 3/5 patients weaning from the ventilator 

(142).  Additional trials are ongoing to better define the safety and efficacy of this strategy. 

Isolation of SARS-CoV2 specific neutralizing antibodies with clonal techniques is an appealing 

strategy  to  provide  targeted  therapy,  potentially  with  lower  risk  of  adverse  events.    Strategies 

currently under investigation include antibodies cloned from convalescent serum of individuals 

recovered  from  SARS-CoV2  or  SARS-CoV1  and  synthetic  antibodies.    It  is  unclear  whether 

differences  in  the  S  proteins  of  SARS-CoV1  and  SARS-CoV2  may  limit  the  effectiveness  of 

antibodies cloned from patients convalescent to SARS-CoV1 (9).  Synthetic antibodies represent 

an exciting, novel therapeutic avenue.  One strategy being explored is to fuse ACE2 to Fc IgG, 

with  the  hypothesis  that  this  synthetic  antibody  would  serve  as  a  decoy  receptor,  preventing 

cellular binding of the virion (143).   

30 

In a similar vein, studies are ongoing of decoy proteins that are designed to act as viral “sinks”.  

There  is  preliminary  success  with  this  strategy  using  soluble  human  ACE2  (34)  (Central 

Illustration). 

Anti-Inflammatory Therapy 

Advanced  stages  of  COVID-19  have  been  likened  to  cytokine  storm  syndromes  with  non-

specific widespread immune activation (114). Elevated levels of inflammatory biomarkers, such 

as IL-6 and hsCRP, identify patients at high risk of progressing to severe disease and death (53). 

Immunomodulatory  and  anti-inflammatory  therapy  have  been  used,  despite  limited  data,  in 

patients with evidence of hyperinflammation in an effort to curb pathologic immune activation.  

Corticosteroids 

Corticosteroids have been used in several, severe viral respiratory infections including influenza, 

SARS-CoV  and  MERS-CoV  with  limited  benefit  and,  in  some  instances,  evidence  of  delayed 

viral  clearance  and  increased  rates  of  secondary  infection  and  mortality  (144).  A  retrospective 

analysis  of  84  patients  with  ARDS  secondary  to  SARS-CoV2  observed  an  association  with 

improved survival in patients who received solumedrol (51). In the absence of robust evidence, 

major  professional  society  guidelines  do  not  recommend  routine  use  of  corticosteroids  in 

treatment  of  COVID-19  but  rather  restricting  its  use  to  patients  with  other  indications  for 

steroids,  such  as  refractory  shock  or  advanced  ARDS  (41).    Clinical  trials  are  ongoing  to 

examine  the  safety  and  efficacy  of  corticosteroids  in  hospitalized  non-critically  ill  COVID-19 

patients  (Clinical  Trials.gov  ID:  NCT04273321)  and  in  those  with  ARDS  (Clinical  Trials.gov 

ID: NCT04323592). 

31 

 

 

 

 

IL-6 Inhibitors 

Elevation of IL-6 in patients with severe COVID-19 has prompted consideration of use of IL-6 

inhibitors (Tocilizumab, Siltuximab) extrapolating from treatment of cytokine release syndrome 

(145). Tociluzimab, a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody, and Siltuximab, a chimeric 

monoclonal  antibody,  both  bind  soluble  and  membrane  bound  IL-6  receptors  resulting  in 

inhibition  of  IL-6-mediated  signaling.  In  one  preprint  case  series  from  China,  21  patients  with 

severe  or  critical  COVID-19  treated  with  tocilizumab  experienced  a  salutary  effect  with 

resolution  of  fever,  improved  oxygenation,  improvement  in  lung  opacities  on  chest  CT, 

resolution  of  lymphopenia  and  a  reduction  in  CRP  levels  within  a  few  days  of  therapy  in  the 

absence of any significant reported adverse events (146). In this preliminary report, 19 patients 

were  discharged  alive  and  2  remained  hospitalized  at  the  time  the  case  series  was  published. 

Several randomized clinical trials of tocilizumab in treatment of severe COVID-19 infection are 

ongoing (NCT04317092; NCT04306705). 

Azithromycin 

Azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, has long been touted for its anti-inflammatory effect and 

has been used as adjunctive therapy in treatment of community acquired pneumonia and chronic 

obstructive  pulmonary  disease  exacerbations  (147).  Limited  data  suggest  that  adjunctive 

azithromycin  in  moderate-severe  ARDS  is  associated  with  improved  outcomes  (148).  A  small 

non-randomized  study  showed  that  combination  azithromycin  and  hydroxychloroquine  was 

associated  with  more  effective  SARS-CoV2  clearance  in  COVID-19  patients  compared  with 

either monotherapy with hydroxychloroquine or standard of care; however, numerous limitations 

32 

 

 

of this study render the data uninterpretable (140). QT interval monitoring is prudent especially 

when used in combination with hydroxychloroquine. Several randomized clinical trials assessing 

the  combination  of  hydroxychloroquine/chloroquine  with  azithromycin  across  the  severity 

spectrum  of  COVID-19  are  ongoing  or  about  be  launched  (NCT04321278,  NCT04322396, 

NCT04322123, NCT04324463). 

Other Anti-Inflammatory Therapies 

JAK-2  inhibitors  inhibit  receptor  mediated-endocytosis  leading  to  the  hypothesis  that  it  might 

prevent cellular entry of the SARS-CoV2 (Figure 1).  Additionally, this class of agents have anti-

inflammatory  effects  by  inhibiting  cytokine  release  (149).  An  agent  in  the  class,  baricitinib,  is 

being  studied  in  an  open-label  non-randomized  pilot  study  in  patients  with  COVID-19 

(NCT04320277).  Currently,  a  3-arm  randomized  control  trial  is  being  launched  to  compare 

anakinra  monotherapy,  emapalumab  monotherapy  and  standard  of  care  (NCT04324021). 

Anakinra is a recombinant monoclonal antibody that blocks IL-1 receptors. It has been used to 

treat  autoimmune  conditions  including  juvenile  idiopathic  arthritis  as  well  as  recurrent 

pericarditis. Emapalumab is a fully human anti-gamma interferon monoclonal antibody that has 

been  approved  by  the  FDA  for  treatment  of  primary  hemophagocytic  lymphohistiocytosis,  a 

disease  reminiscent  of  the  hyperinflammatory  state  seen  in  advanced  COVID-19.  Finally, 

colchicine, a microtubule polymerization inhibitor and anti-inflammatory drug, is being tested in 

a large randomized clinical trial of ambulatory COVID-19 patients (NCT04322682). 

Other Therapies 

Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors & Angiotensin Receptor Blockers 

33 

 

 

 

ACE-2  receptor  mediated  endocytosis  of  SARS-CoV2  is  central  to  the  viral  life  cycle. 

Conflicting data exist regarding the effect  of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone-inhibitors (RAASi), 

including ACE-I and ARB, on ACE2 activity/levels in various human tissues and the resultant 

susceptibility  to  infection  with  SARS-CoV2  (18).   The  totality  of  the  available  data  is 

insufficient to recommend cessation of ACE-I/ARB in individuals with an existing indication for 

life-prolonging  therapy  with  these  drugs  and  major  societies  have  strongly  recommended 

continuation of ACE-I/ARB therapy. An open label randomized trial is on the way to examine 

the effect of prophylactic ACE-I/ARB withdrawal in COVID-19 naive individuals with essential 

hypertension  as  the  sole  indication  for  treatment  on  the  risk  of  infection  and  subsequent 

complications (NCT04330300).   Based on the pre-clinical data described earlier in this review, 

two  paired  trials  are  currently  underway  examining  losartan  therapy  in  COVID-19  who  are 

ambulatory (NCT04311177) and hospitalized (NCT04312009).  

 

Statins 

The anti-inflammatory pleiotropic effects of statins have been cultivated in different pathologic 

states.    Statins  have  been  shown  in  murine  models  of  acute  lung  injury  and  in  humans  to 

attenuate  the  inflammatory  component  of  acute  lung  injury  (150,151).  A  multi-center 

randomized trial of simvastatin in patients with versatile causes of ARDS showed no difference 

as  compared  to  placebo  in  ventilator  free  days,  multi-organ  failure  and  mortality  (152).  A 

subsequent study, subphenotyping the trial population in to hyper vs. hypoinflammatory ARDS, 

found  a  statistically  significant 

improvement 

in  survival  with  simvastatin 

in 

the 

hyperinflammatory group (153). A post-hoc analysis of the JUPITER trial observed a reduction 

 

34 

in  incident  pneumonia  with  rosuvastatin  (154).    The  benefit  of  statin  therapy  in  the 

hyperinflammatory state in advanced COVID-19 is unknown. 

Vaccines Against SARS-CoV2 

As  discovery  of  a  safe  and  efficacious  vaccine  again  SARS-CoV2  is  clearly  the  aspiration  for 

preventative  strategies,  intense  efforts  are  ongoing  employing  numerous  approaches  with 

accelerated testing.  It is believed that all 4 structural proteins, E, M, N and S proteins, may serve 

as  antigens  for  neutralizing  antibody  and  CD4+CD8+  T  cell  responses  (155).   Based  on  the 

experience with SARS-CoV1 vaccine development, it seems that the most promising candidates 

target 

the  S  protein,  which 

induces  humoral  and  protective  cellular 

immunity  (8).  

Encouragingly,  administration  of  full-length  or  the  ACE2-receptor  binding  domain  of  the  S 

protein  of  SARS-CoV1  induced  highly  potent  neutralizing  antibodies  that  conveyed  protective 

immunity in animal models (156,157). 

Potential  delivery  strategies  include  inactivated  or  attenuated  virus,  subunit  vaccines,  viral 

vectors, DNA or RNA-based vaccines (158).  Live attenuated viral vaccines are likely to induce 

significant  immune  response  but  may  carry  risk  of  disease,  particularly  in  immunosuppressed 

individuals.  Inactivated “whole” viral or subunit vaccines are relatively easy to develop, but do 

not  induce  immediate  or  complete  immunity,  typically  requiring  multiple  doses  to  promote 

humoral, but often not cellular, immunity.  Immunity may also wane over time, requiring booster 

dosing.    Viral  vector-based  vaccines  would  employ  other  viruses,  such  as  the  vaccina  virus  (a 

poxvirus used for the smallpox  vaccine) or adenovirus, to  display  SARS-CoV2 antigens.  This 

strategy can promote robust cytotoxic T cell responses but may fail in the face of the pre-existing 

35 

 

 

 

immunity  to  or  toxicity  of  the  viral  vector  (159).   Nucleic  acid-based  strategies,  which  work 

through delivery of DNA or RNA that are translated by host machinery to produce viral protein 

antigens, are relatively simple to design but may be limited by toxicity and/or stability concerns.  

Of  note,  at  this  time,  there  are  no  approved  DNA  or  RNA  vaccines  for  humans.    Most 

approaches  to  SARS-CoV2  are  in  pre-clinical  development,  with  several  early  trials  of  RNA 

(NCT04283461)  and  viral-vector  (NCT04299724,  NCT04313127,  NCT04276896)  vaccine 

strategies ongoing. 

Crisis Standards of Care and Ethical Resource Allocation 

Estimates  suggest  that,  as  has  happened  in  Italy  and  Spain,  the  burden  of  COVID-19  will  far 

outstrip the healthcare capacity  in the US and globally with insufficient availability of  hospital 

and ICU bed capacity, healthcare providers and specific therapeutic or supportive interventions, 

such as mechanical ventilation and renal replacement (160). For this reason, organizations, such 

as the Italian Society of Anesthesia, Analgesia, Resuscitation and Intensive Care (SIAARTI) and 

individual healthcare institutions are developing guidance for allocation of resources in the event 

that adequate, additional resources cannot be obtained (161).  These efforts are building off of  a 

set of principles established in the wake of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic.    

At that time, the US  Department  of Health and  Human Services  commissioned  the  Institute of 

Medicine (IOM) to provide expert guidance on implementing alternative standards of healthcare 

in the setting of a disaster.  In their report, the IOM defined the principles of “crisis standards of 

care”, defined as a substantial change in usual healthcare operations, including the level of care 

possible  to  deliver,  in  the  setting  of  a  pervasive  or  catastrophic  disaster.(162)     Notably,  this 

36 

 

 

 

framework recognizes that “the formal declaration that crisis standards of care are  in operation 

enables specific legal/regulatory powers and protection for healthcare providers in the necessary 

task of allocating and using scarce medical resources.”  Appreciating the distress associated with 

allocation of scarce medical resources, the IOM recommend that the process be guided by seven 

ethical  principles:  fairness,  duty  to  care,  duty  to  steward  resources,  transparency,  consistency, 

proportionality and accountability (162).   

Working  with  these  principles,  ethicists  have  come  to  a  general  consensus  that  the  goal  is  to 

maximize  benefit  while  maintaining  equity,  objectivity  and 

transparency 

(160,163).   

Maximizing  benefit  ideally  involves  preserving  the  most  lives  as  well  as  the  most  life-years, 

acknowledging the importance of prognosis.  While the practical application of these principles 

is  challenging,  there  appears  to  be  general  agreement  across  the  literature  on  a  number  of 

concepts  (160,163,164)       Most  recommend  development  of  a  triage  or  scoring  system  that 

accounts for acute and pre-morbid prognosis in order to allocate scarce resources to those who 

are most likely to benefit.  The scoring system  should  utilize objective clinical  information, in 

order to minimize the need for clinical judgement and the risk of introducing inconsistency and 

bias.  The use of the system - and the determination that stems from it - should be transparent to 

providers,  patients  and  families.   Triage  should  be  applied  broadly  to  all  patients  requiring  a 

particular resource, not just those suffering from the pandemic disease (e.g. applies to decision to 

use  VA  ECMO  in  patients  with  myocarditis  due  to  COVID-19  and  cardiogenic  shock  from  a 

non-COVID-19 etiology).  A random system (e.g. lottery) should be used to break “ties” in cases 

with  a  similar  estimated  prognosis,  rather  than  a  first-come-first  serve  approach.    Importantly, 

many  advocate  that  an  independent  triage  physician  make  the  determination  to  remove  the 

37 

 

 

burden from the bedside healthcare team.  The triage physician may be supported, as necessary, 

by a triage committee, comprised of experts in the area of ethics and relevant medical fields.  

Areas of controversy include whether there should be priority allowed for healthcare providers.  

Some ethicists argue that they should not be prioritized as that are unlikely to recovery in a time 

frame that would allow them  to  continue their professional  responsibilities.(163)  Others argue 

that  granting  priority  recognizes  the  assumption  of  risk  and  also  encourages  ongoing 

participation  in  patient  care  (160).     Along  the  same  line,  an  argument  has  also  been  made  to 

prioritize research participation (160).   

The  optimal  tool  for  prognostication  also  remains  elusive.    The  sequential  organ  failure 

assessment (SOFA) score has been suggested as quantitative assessment of acute illness severity; 

however, there is  a recognition  that this  tool may  not  be well calibrated  to  all populations  and 

could lead to inaccurate assessments of prognosis (165,166).   

The  value  of  pre-determination  of  this  framework  with  community  and  provider  engagement, 

establishment of legal authority and logistic and operational preparedness is clear.  Nevertheless, 

acknowledging the prospect of large-scale rationing of healthcare is heartbreaking and foreign to 

most civilian healthcare providers in developed countries.   

Summary 

In  just  a  few  short  months,  SARS-CoV2  has  spread  across  the  world  with  distressing  speed, 

threatening  global  economic  and  individual  health  and  well-being.    Many  regional  healthcare 

38 

 

 

 

 

 

systems  are  overwhelmed  and  under-resourced,  forcing  clinicians  and  administrators  to  make 

previously unthinkable decisions regarding allocation of medical care.  However, in the wake of 

this  devastation,  clinicians  and  scientists  have  rallied  together  to  rapidly  evolve  our 

understanding  of  all  aspects  of  SARS-CoV2  infection,  from  the  basic  virology,  to  the  human 

manifestations  to  therapeutic  and  preventative  strategies.    This  unprecedented  collective  effort 

will, without a doubt, advance our ability to  prevent  the spread and optimally  care for patients 

suffering from COVID-19.     

Acknowledgments 

manuscript.  

 

The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Andrew  Karaba,  MD,  PhD  for  his  review  of  the 

39 

 

 

 

Figure Legends 

Figure 1: Putative SARS-CoV2 Life Cycle and Therapeutic Targets.   

The SARS2-CoV2 virus binds to the ACE2 receptor on the host cell membrane.  Endocytosis is 

believed  to  be  mediated,  in  part,  by  JAK-2.    Membrane  fusion  occurs  between  the  mature 

endosome  and  virion  with  facilitation  by  the  transmembrane  serine  protease  2  (TMPRSS2) 

resulting in release of the SARS-CoV2 RNA into the intracellular space.  The RNA is translated 

by  host  machinery  to  produce  the  replicase  and  structural  proteins.    Host  and  SARS-CoV2 

proteases cleave the replicase to in non-structural proteins, including the RNA-dependent RNA 

polymerase (RdRp).  RdRp mediates SARS-CoV2 RNA replication and amplification.  SARS-

CoV2  transmembrane  proteins  (S,  E  and  M)  are  shuttled  via  the  endoplasmic  reticulum  and 

Golgi  apparatus  to  the forming viral  capsids.   Viral  assembly occurs with addition  of the viral 

RNA  and  N  protein  through  association  with  the  transmembrane  viral  proteins.    Exocytosis 

results in release of the newly synthesized viral particle.   

 

40 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Central Illustration: Potential Mechanisms of Myocardial Injury in COVID-19 

MI  denotes  myocardial  infarction;  ASCVD,  atherosclerotic  cardiovascular  disease;  DIC, 

disseminated intravascular coagulation. 

 

41 

References 

1. 

Fehr AR, Perlman S. Coronaviruses: an overview of their replication and pathogenesis. Methods 

in molecular biology 2015;1282:1-23. 

2. 

Zhu N, Zhang D, Wang W et al. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 

2019. The New England journal of medicine 2020;382:727-733. 

3. 

Cui J, Li F, Shi ZL. Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nature reviews Microbiology 

2019;17:181-192. 

4. 

Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of 

probable bat origin. Nature 2020;579:270-273. 

5. 

Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B et al. A new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. 

6. 

Prentice E, McAuliffe J, Lu X, Subbarao K, Denison MR. Identification and characterization of 

severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus replicase proteins. Journal of virology 

Nature 2020;579:265-269. 

2004;78:9977-86. 

7. 

Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and 

TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 2020. 

8. 

Du L, He Y, Zhou Y, Liu S, Zheng BJ, Jiang S. The spike protein of SARS-CoV--a target for vaccine 

and therapeutic development. Nature reviews Microbiology 2009;7:226-36. 

9. 

Wrapp D, Wang N, Corbett KS et al. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion 

conformation. Science 2020;367:1260-1263. 

10. 

Yan R, Zhang Y, Li Y, Xia L, Guo Y, Zhou Q. Structural basis for the recognition of SARS-CoV-2 by 

full-length human ACE2. Science 2020;367:1444-1448. 

11. 

Shang J, Ye G, Shi K et al. Structural basis of receptor recognition by SARS-CoV-2. Nature 2020. 

 

42 

12. 

Siu YL, Teoh KT, Lo J et al. The M, E, and N structural proteins of the severe acute respiratory 

syndrome coronavirus are required for efficient assembly, trafficking, and release of virus-like 

particles. Journal of virology 2008;82:11318-30. 

13.  Walls AC, Park YJ, Tortorici MA, Wall A, McGuire AT, Veesler D. Structure, Function, and 

Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 2020. 

14. 

Bosch BJ, Smits SL, Haagmans BL. Membrane ectopeptidases targeted by human coronaviruses. 

15. 

Cheng A, Zhang W, Xie Y et al. Expression, purification, and characterization of SARS coronavirus 

16. 

Li W, Moore MJ, Vasilieva N et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is a functional receptor for 

Current opinion in virology 2014;6:55-60. 

RNA polymerase. Virology 2005;335:165-76. 

the SARS coronavirus. Nature 2003;426:450-4. 

17. 

Dijkman R, Jebbink MF, Deijs M et al. Replication-dependent downregulation of cellular 

angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protein expression by human coronavirus NL63. The Journal of 

general virology 2012;93:1924-1929. 

18. 

Vaduganathan M, Vardeny O, Michel T, McMurray JJV, Pfeffer MA, Solomon SD. Renin-

Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors in Patients with Covid-19. The New England journal 

19. 

Clerkin KJ, Fried JA, Raikhelkar J et al. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) and Cardiovascular 

of medicine 2020. 

Disease. Circulation 2020. 

20. 

Brosnihan KB, Neves LA, Chappell MC. Does the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)/ACE2 

balance contribute to the fate of angiotensin peptides in programmed hypertension? 

Hypertension 2005;46:1097-9. 

21. 

Tikellis C, Thomas MC. Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2) Is a Key Modulator of the Renin 

Angiotensin System in Health and Disease. International journal of peptides 2012;2012:256294. 

 

43 

22. 

Hamming I, Cooper ME, Haagmans BL et al. The emerging role of ACE2 in physiology and 

disease. The Journal of pathology 2007;212:1-11. 

23. 

Vickers C, Hales P, Kaushik V et al. Hydrolysis of biological peptides by human angiotensin-

converting enzyme-related carboxypeptidase. The Journal of biological chemistry 

2002;277:14838-43. 

24. 

Hamming I, Timens W, Bulthuis ML, Lely AT, Navis G, van Goor H. Tissue distribution of ACE2 

protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS 

pathogenesis. The Journal of pathology 2004;203:631-7. 

25.  Wang C, Horby PW, Hayden FG, Gao GF. A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health concern. 

26. 

Imai Y, Kuba K, Rao S et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protects from severe acute lung 

Lancet 2020;395:470-473. 

failure. Nature 2005;436:112-6. 

27. 

Yang P, Gu H, Zhao Z et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) mediates influenza H7N9 

virus-induced acute lung injury. Scientific reports 2014;4:7027. 

28. 

Zou Z, Yan Y, Shu Y et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 protects from lethal avian influenza A 

H5N1 infections. Nature communications 2014;5:3594. 

29. 

Kuba K, Imai Y, Rao S et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS 

coronavirus-induced lung injury. Nature medicine 2005;11:875-9. 

30. 

Crackower MA, Sarao R, Oudit GY et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 is an essential 

regulator of heart function. Nature 2002;417:822-8. 

31. 

Lambert DW, Yarski M, Warner FJ et al. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha convertase (ADAM17) 

mediates regulated ectodomain shedding of the severe-acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus 

(SARS-CoV) receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2). The Journal of biological 

chemistry 2005;280:30113-9. 

 

44 

32. 

Gu H, Xie Z, Li T et al. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 inhibits lung injury induced by 

respiratory syncytial virus. Scientific reports 2016;6:19840. 

33. 

Khan A, Benthin C, Zeno B et al. A pilot clinical trial of recombinant human angiotensin-

converting enzyme 2 in acute respiratory distress syndrome. Critical care 2017;21:234. 

34. 

Monteil V KH, Prado P, Hagelkruys A, Wimmer RA, Stahl M, Leopoldi A, Garreta E, Hurtado del 

Pozo C, Prosper F, Romero JP, Wirnsberger G, Zhang H, Slutsky AS, Conder R, Montserrat N, 

Mirazimi A, Penninger J. Inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 infections in engineered human tissues using 

35. 

Huang C, Wang Y, Li X et al. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in 

clinical-grade soluble human ACE2. Cell 2020. 

Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020;395:497-506. 

36. 

Lu R, Zhao X, Li J et al. Genomic characterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: 

implications for virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 2020;395:565-574. 

37. 

Chan JF, Yuan S, Kok KH et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel 

coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 

2020;395:514-523. 

38. 

van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH et al. Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as 

Compared with SARS-CoV-1. The New England journal of medicine 2020. 

39. 

Moriarty LF, Plucinski MM, Marston BJ et al. Public Health Responses to COVID-19 Outbreaks on 

Cruise Ships - Worldwide, February-March 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:347-

40.  Wang W, Xu Y, Gao R et al. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Different Types of Clinical Specimens. 

352. 

Jama 2020. 

 

45 

41. 

Alhazzani W, Moller MH, Arabi YM et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign: Guidelines on the 

Management of Critically Ill Adults with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Critical care 

medicine 2020. 

42. 

Li R, Pei S, Chen B et al. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination 

of novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV2). Science 2020. 

43. 

Callaway E, Cyranoski D, Mallapaty S, Stoye E, Tollefson J. The coronavirus pandemic in five 

powerful charts. Nature 2020;579:482-483. 

44.  Wei WE LZ, Chiew CJ, Yong SE, Toh MP, Lee VJ. Presymptomatic Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 — 

Singapore, January 23–March 16, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep  

45.  Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus Disease 

2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72314 Cases From the Chinese 

Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Jama 2020. 

46. 

Centers for Disease C. Severe Outcomes Among Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-

19) — United States. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:343-346. 

47. 

Lipsitch M, Swerdlow DL, Finelli L. Defining the Epidemiology of Covid-19 - Studies Needed. The 

New England journal of medicine 2020;382:1194-1196. 

48. 

Guan WJ, Ni ZY, Hu Y et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. The 

New England journal of medicine 2020. 

49. 

Surgery AAoO-HaN. 

50. 

Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q et al. The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 

From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Ann Intern Med 2020. 

51.  Wu C, Chen X, Cai Y et al. Risk Factors Associated With Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome and 

Death in Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. JAMA Intern Med 

2020. 

 

46 

52.  Wang D, Hu B, Hu C et al. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel 

Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. Jama 2020. 

53. 

Zhou F, Yu T, Du R et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with 

COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 2020;395:1054-1062. 

54. 

Guo T, Fan Y, Chen M et al. Cardiovascular Implications of Fatal Outcomes of Patients With 

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiol 2020. 

55. 

Arentz M, Yim E, Klaff L et al. Characteristics and Outcomes of 21 Critically Ill Patients With 

COVID-19 in Washington State. Jama 2020. 

56. 

Shi S, Qin M, Shen B et al. Association of Cardiac Injury With Mortality in Hospitalized Patients 

With COVID-19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Cardiol 2020. 

57. 

Chen N, Zhou M, Dong X et al. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 

novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 2020;395:507-513. 

58. 

Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality due to COVID-19 based 

on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. Intensive Care Med 2020. 

59. 

Cheng Y LR, Wang K, Zhang M, Wang Z, Dong L, Li J, Yao Y, Ge S, Xu G.  . Kidney disease is 

associated with in-hospital death of patients with COVID-19. Kidney International 2020. 

60. 

Inciardi RM, Lupi L, Zaccone G et al. Cardiac Involvement in a Patient With Coronavirus Disease 

2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiol 2020. 

61. 

Fleet JC, Clinton SK, Salomon RN, Loppnow H, Libby P. Atherogenic diets enhance endotoxin-

stimulated interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor gene expression in rabbit aortae. J Nutr 

62. 

Estabragh ZR, Mamas MA. The cardiovascular manifestations of influenza: a systematic review. 

1992;122:294-305. 

Int J Cardiol 2013;167:2397-403. 

 

47 

63. 

Hu H, Ma F, Wei X, Fang Y. Coronavirus fulminant myocarditis saved with glucocorticoid and 

human immunoglobulin. Eur Heart J 2020. 

64. 

Deng Y, Liu W, Liu K et al. Clinical characteristics of fatal and recovered cases of coronavirus 

disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Wuhan, China: a retrospective study. Chin Med J (Engl) 2020. 

65. 

Hwang DM, Chamberlain DW, Poutanen SM, Low DE, Asa SL, Butany J. Pulmonary pathology of 

severe acute respiratory syndrome in Toronto. Mod Pathol 2005;18:1-10. 

66. 

Luo WY, H.; Gou, J.; Li, X.; Sun, Y.; Li, J.; Liu, L. Clinical Pathology of Critical Patient with Novel 

Coronavirus Pneumonia (COVID-19). Preprints 2020. 

67. 

Hematology ASo. COVID-19 and Coagulopathy: Frequently Asked Questions. 2020. 

68. 

Ruan S. Likelihood of survival of coronavirus disease 2019. Lancet Infect Dis 2020. 

69. 

Medicine JHU. Coronavirus Resource Center. 2020. 

70. 

Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I et al. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a 

71. 

Onder G, Rezza G, Brusaferro S. Case-Fatality Rate and Characteristics of Patients Dying in 

model-based analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2020. 

Relation to COVID-19 in Italy. Jama 2020. 

and the Republic of Korea. Clin Infect Dis 2020. 

72. 

Dudley JP, Lee NT. Disparities in Age-Specific Morbidity and Mortality from SARS-CoV-2 in China 

73. 

Kumar A, Thota V, Dee L, Olson J, Uretz E, Parrillo JE. Tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 

1beta are responsible for in vitro myocardial cell depression induced by human septic shock 

serum. J Exp Med 1996;183:949-58. 

74. 

Oudit GY, Kassiri Z, Jiang C et al. SARS-coronavirus modulation of myocardial ACE2 expression 

and inflammation in patients with SARS. Eur J Clin Invest 2009;39:618-25. 

 

48 

75. 

Ding Y, He L, Zhang Q et al. Organ distribution of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) 

associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in SARS patients: implications for pathogenesis and virus 

transmission pathways. The Journal of pathology 2004;203:622-30. 

76. 

To KF, Tong JH, Chan PK et al. Tissue and cellular tropism of the coronavirus associated with 

severe acute respiratory syndrome: an in-situ hybridization study of fatal cases. The Journal of 

pathology 2004;202:157-63. 

77. 

Ding Y, Wang H, Shen H et al. The clinical pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome 

(SARS): a report from China. The Journal of pathology 2003;200:282-9. 

78. 

Guillevin L. Virus-induced systemic vasculitides: new therapeutic approaches. Clin Dev Immunol 

79. 

Pagnoux C, Cohen P, Guillevin L. Vasculitides secondary to infections. Clin Exp Rheumatol 

80. 

Ding YQ, Wang HJ, Shen H et al. [Study on etiology and pathology of severe acute respiratory 

syndrome]. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi 2003;32:195-200. 

81. 

Tang N, Li D, Wang X, Sun Z. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with poor 

prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. J Thromb Haemost 2020;18:844-847. 

82. 

Levi M, van der Poll T, ten Cate H, van Deventer SJ. The cytokine-mediated imbalance between 

coagulant and anticoagulant mechanisms in sepsis and endotoxaemia. Eur J Clin Invest 

83. 

Simmons J, Pittet JF. The coagulopathy of acute sepsis. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 2015;28:227-36. 

84. 

Nakamura S, Imamura T, Okamoto K. Tissue factor in neutrophils: yes. J Thromb Haemost 

2004;11:227-31. 

2006;24:S71-81. 

1997;27:3-9. 

2004;2:214-7. 

 

49 

85. 

van der Poll T, Buller HR, ten Cate H et al. Activation of coagulation after administration of 

tumor necrosis factor to normal subjects. The New England journal of medicine 1990;322:1622-

7. 

86. 

de Jonge E, Friederich PW, Vlasuk GP et al. Activation of coagulation by administration of 

recombinant factor VIIa elicits interleukin 6 (IL-6) and IL-8 release in healthy human subjects. 

Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 2003;10:495-7. 

87. 

Franco RF, de Jonge E, Dekkers PE et al. The in vivo kinetics of tissue factor messenger RNA 

expression during human endotoxemia: relationship with activation of coagulation. Blood 

88. 

Levi M, van der Poll T, Buller HR. Bidirectional relation between inflammation and coagulation. 

89. 

Della Valle P, Pavani G, D'Angelo A. The protein C pathway and sepsis. Thromb Res 

2000;96:554-9. 

Circulation 2004;109:2698-704. 

2012;129:296-300. 

2002;87:218-23. 

90. 

Green J, Doughty L, Kaplan SS, Sasser H, Carcillo JA. The tissue factor and plasminogen activator 

inhibitor type-1 response in pediatric sepsis-induced multiple organ failure. Thromb Haemost 

91. 

Cox D, Kerrigan SW, Watson SP. Platelets and the innate immune system: mechanisms of 

bacterial-induced platelet activation. J Thromb Haemost 2011;9:1097-107. 

92. 

Gawaz M, Dickfeld T, Bogner C, Fateh-Moghadam S, Neumann FJ. Platelet function in septic 

multiple organ dysfunction syndrome. Intensive Care Med 1997;23:379-85. 

93. 

Akca S, Haji-Michael P, de Mendonca A, Suter P, Levi M, Vincent JL. Time course of platelet 

counts in critically ill patients. Critical care medicine 2002;30:753-6. 

94. 

Lee KH, Hui KP, Tan WC. Thrombocytopenia in sepsis: a predictor of mortality in the intensive 

care unit. Singapore Med J 1993;34:245-6. 

 

50 

95. 

Medina de Chazal H, Del Buono MG, Keyser-Marcus L et al. Stress Cardiomyopathy Diagnosis 

and Treatment: JACC State-of-the-Art Review. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;72:1955-1971. 

96. 

Corrales-Medina VF, Alvarez KN, Weissfeld LA et al. Association between hospitalization for 

pneumonia and subsequent risk of cardiovascular disease. Jama 2015;313:264-74. 

97. 

Udell JA, Zawi R, Bhatt DL et al. Association between influenza vaccination and cardiovascular 

outcomes in high-risk patients: a meta-analysis. Jama 2013;310:1711-20. 

98. 

Kwong JC, Schwartz KL, Campitelli MA et al. Acute Myocardial Infarction after Laboratory-

Confirmed Influenza Infection. The New England journal of medicine 2018;378:345-353. 

99.  Welt FGP, Shah PB, Aronow HD et al. Catheterization Laboratory Considerations During the 

Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic: From ACC's Interventional Council and SCAI. J Am Coll Cardiol 

2020. 

100. 

Libby P, Loscalzo J, Ridker PM et al. Inflammation, Immunity, and Infection in Atherothrombosis: 

JACC Review Topic of the Week. J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;72:2071-2081. 

101. 

Ridker PM, Everett BM, Thuren T et al. Antiinflammatory Therapy with Canakinumab for 

Atherosclerotic Disease. The New England journal of medicine 2017;377:1119-1131. 

102. 

Libby P. Inflammation in atherosclerosis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 2012;32:2045-51. 

103. 

Violi F, Cangemi R, Calvieri C. Pneumonia, thrombosis and vascular disease. J Thromb Haemost 

2014;12:1391-400. 

104.  Mogensen TH. Pathogen recognition and inflammatory signaling in innate immune defenses. 

Clin Microbiol Rev 2009;22:240-73, Table of Contents. 

105. 

van de Veerdonk FL, Netea MG, Dinarello CA, Joosten LA. Inflammasome activation and IL-1beta 

and IL-18 processing during infection. Trends Immunol 2011;32:110-6. 

106. 

Vallance P, Collier J, Bhagat K. Infection, inflammation, and infarction: does acute endothelial 

dysfunction provide a link? Lancet 1997;349:1391-2. 

 

51 

107. 

Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS et al. Prognostic Impact of Myocardial Injury Related to Various 

Cardiac and Noncardiac Conditions. Am J Med 2016;129:506-514 e1. 

108. 

Lim W, Qushmaq I, Devereaux PJ et al. Elevated cardiac troponin measurements in critically ill 

patients. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:2446-54. 

109. 

Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS et al. Clinical Characteristics and Outcomes of Patients with 

Myocardial Infarction, Myocardial Injury, and Nonelevated Troponins. Am J Med 2016;129:446 

110. 

Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS et al. Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018). 

e5-446 e21. 

J Am Coll Cardiol 2018;72:2231-2264. 

111. 

Chapman AR, Shah ASV, Lee KK et al. Long-Term Outcomes in Patients With Type 2 Myocardial 

Infarction and Myocardial Injury. Circulation 2018;137:1236-1245. 

112.  Qin C, Zhou L, Hu Z et al. Dysregulation of immune response in patients with COVID-19 in 

Wuhan, China. Clin Infect Dis 2020. 

113. 

Grupp SA, Kalos M, Barrett D et al. Chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cells for acute 

lymphoid leukemia. The New England journal of medicine 2013;368:1509-1518. 

114.  Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M et al. COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and 

immunosuppression. Lancet 2020;395:1033-1034. 

115. 

Siddiqi H, Mehra, MR. COVID-19 Illness in Native and Immunosuppressed States: A Clinical-

Therapeutic Staging Proposal. The Journal of Heart and Lung Transplantation 2020. 

116. 

Frey N, Porter D. Cytokine Release Syndrome with Chimeric Antigen Receptor T Cell Therapy. 

Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2019;25:e123-e127. 

117.  Natanson C, Eichenholz PW, Danner RL et al. Endotoxin and tumor necrosis factor challenges in 

dogs simulate the cardiovascular profile of human septic shock. J Exp Med 1989;169:823-32. 

 

52 

118. 

Pathan N, Hemingway CA, Alizadeh AA et al. Role of interleukin 6 in myocardial dysfunction of 

meningococcal septic shock. Lancet 2004;363:203-9. 

119. 

Goldhaber JI, Kim KH, Natterson PD, Lawrence T, Yang P, Weiss JN. Effects of TNF-alpha on 

[Ca2+]i and contractility in isolated adult rabbit ventricular myocytes. Am J Physiol 

1996;271:H1449-55. 

120. 

Krown KA, Yasui K, Brooker MJ et al. TNF alpha receptor expression in rat cardiac myocytes: TNF 

alpha inhibition of L-type Ca2+ current and Ca2+ transients. FEBS Lett 1995;376:24-30. 

121. 

Hobai IA, Edgecomb J, LaBarge K, Colucci WS. Dysregulation of intracellular calcium transporters 

in animal models of sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy. Shock 2015;43:3-15. 

122. 

Balligand JL, Ungureanu D, Kelly RA et al. Abnormal contractile function due to induction of 

nitric oxide synthesis in rat cardiac myocytes follows exposure to activated macrophage-

conditioned medium. J Clin Invest 1993;91:2314-9. 

123. 

Stanzani G, Duchen MR, Singer M. The role of mitochondria in sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy. 

Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 2019;1865:759-773. 

124.  Mulangu S, Dodd LE, Davey RT, Jr. et al. A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Ebola Virus Disease 

Therapeutics. The New England journal of medicine 2019;381:2293-2303. 

125. 

Holshue ML, DeBolt C, Lindquist S et al. First Case of 2019 Novel Coronavirus in the United 

States. The New England journal of medicine 2020;382:929-936. 

126. 

Gordon CJ, Tchesnokov EP, Feng JY, Porter DP, Gotte M. The antiviral compound remdesivir 

potently inhibits RNA-dependent RNA polymerase from Middle East respiratory syndrome 

coronavirus. The Journal of biological chemistry 2020. 

127. 

Sheahan TP, Sims AC, Leist SR et al. Comparative therapeutic efficacy of remdesivir and 

combination lopinavir, ritonavir, and interferon beta against MERS-CoV. Nature communications 

2020;11:222. 

 

53 

128. 

Harrison C. Coronavirus puts drug repurposing on the fast track. Nature biotechnology 2020. 

129. 

Dong L, Hu S, Gao J. Discovering drugs to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Drug 

discoveries & therapeutics 2020;14:58-60. 

130. 

Chan KW, Wong VT, Tang SCW. COVID-19: An Update on the Epidemiological, Clinical, 

Preventive and Therapeutic Evidence and Guidelines of Integrative Chinese-Western Medicine 

for the Management of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease. The American journal of Chinese 

medicine 2020:1-26. 

131. 

Cao B, Wang Y, Wen D et al. A Trial of Lopinavir-Ritonavir in Adults Hospitalized with Severe 

Covid-19. The New England journal of medicine 2020. 

132. 

Zhang L, Lin D, Sun X et al. Crystal structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for 

design of improved alpha-ketoamide inhibitors. Science 2020. 

133. 

Chen H ZZ, Wang L, Huang Z, Gong F, Li X, Chen Y, Wu JJ. First Clinical Study Using HCV Protease 

Inhibitor Danoprevir to Treat Naive and Experienced COVID-19 Patients. MedRxiv 2020. 

134. 

Savarino A, Gennero L, Sperber K, Boelaert JR. The anti-HIV-1 activity of chloroquine. Journal of 

clinical virology : the official publication of the Pan American Society for Clinical Virology 

2001;20:131-5. 

135. 

Savarino A, Gennero L, Chen HC et al. Anti-HIV effects of chloroquine: mechanisms of inhibition 

and spectrum of activity. Aids 2001;15:2221-9. 

136.  Mauthe M, Orhon I, Rocchi C et al. Chloroquine inhibits autophagic flux by decreasing 

autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Autophagy 2018;14:1435-1455. 

137. 

Scott CC, Vacca F, Gruenberg J. Endosome maturation, transport and functions. Seminars in cell 

138. 

Vincent MJ, Bergeron E, Benjannet S et al. Chloroquine is a potent inhibitor of SARS coronavirus 

& developmental biology 2014;31:2-10. 

infection and spread. Virology journal 2005;2:69. 

 

54 

139. 

Liu J, Cao R, Xu M et al. Hydroxychloroquine, a less toxic derivative of chloroquine, is effective in 

inhibiting SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro. Cell discovery 2020;6:16. 

140. 

Gautret P, Lagier JC, Parola P et al. Hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin as a treatment of 

COVID-19: results of an open-label non-randomized clinical trial. International journal of 

antimicrobial agents 2020:105949. 

141. 

Gordon DE JG, Bouhaddou M, Xu J, et al. A SARS-CoV-2-Human Protein-Protein Interaction Map 

Reveals Drug Targets and Potential Drug-Repurposing. BioRxiv 2020. 

142. 

Shen C, Wang Z, Zhao F et al. Treatment of 5 Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 With 

143. 

Lei C FW, Zian K, Li T, Zhang S, Ding M, Hu S. Potent neutralization of 2019 novel coronavirus by 

Convalescent Plasma. Jama 2020. 

recombinant ACE2-Ig. BioRxiv 2020. 

144. 

Russell CD, Millar JE, Baillie JK. Clinical evidence does not support corticosteroid treatment for 

2019-nCoV lung injury. Lancet 2020;395:473-475. 

145. 

Le RQ, Li L, Yuan W et al. FDA Approval Summary: Tocilizumab for Treatment of Chimeric 

Antigen Receptor T Cell-Induced Severe or Life-Threatening Cytokine Release Syndrome. The 

oncologist 2018;23:943-947. 

146. 

Xu X HM, Li T, Sun W, Wang D, Fu B, Zhou Y, Zheng X, Yang Y, Li X, Zhang X, Pan A, Wei H. 

Effective Treatment of Severe COVID-19 Patients with Tocilizumab. ChinaXiv 2020. 

147. 

Zimmermann P, Ziesenitz VC, Curtis N, Ritz N. The Immunomodulatory Effects of Macrolides-A 

Systematic Review of the Underlying Mechanisms. Frontiers in immunology 2018;9:302. 

148. 

Kawamura K, Ichikado K, Takaki M, Eguchi Y, Anan K, Suga M. Adjunctive therapy with 

azithromycin for moderate and severe acute respiratory distress syndrome: a retrospective, 

propensity score-matching analysis of prospectively collected data at a single center. 

International journal of antimicrobial agents 2018;51:918-924. 

 

55 

149. 

Richardson P, Griffin I, Tucker C et al. Baricitinib as potential treatment for 2019-nCoV acute 

respiratory disease. Lancet 2020;395:e30-e31. 

150. 

Jacobson JR, Barnard JW, Grigoryev DN, Ma SF, Tuder RM, Garcia JG. Simvastatin attenuates 

vascular leak and inflammation in murine inflammatory lung injury. American journal of 

physiology Lung cellular and molecular physiology 2005;288:L1026-32. 

151. 

Shyamsundar M, McKeown ST, O'Kane CM et al. Simvastatin decreases lipopolysaccharide-

induced pulmonary inflammation in healthy volunteers. American journal of respiratory and 

critical care medicine 2009;179:1107-14. 

152.  McAuley DF, Laffey JG, O'Kane CM et al. Simvastatin in the acute respiratory distress syndrome. 

The New England journal of medicine 2014;371:1695-703. 

153. 

Calfee CS, Delucchi KL, Sinha P et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome subphenotypes and 

differential response to simvastatin: secondary analysis of a randomised controlled trial. The 

Lancet Respiratory medicine 2018;6:691-698. 

154.  Novack V, MacFadyen J, Malhotra A, Almog Y, Glynn RJ, Ridker PM. The effect of rosuvastatin on 

incident pneumonia: results from the JUPITER trial. CMAJ 2012;184:E367-72. 

155. 

Jiang S, He Y, Liu S. SARS vaccine development. Emerging infectious diseases 2005;11:1016-20. 

156. 

Bukreyev A, Lamirande EW, Buchholz UJ et al. Mucosal immunisation of African green monkeys 

(Cercopithecus aethiops) with an attenuated parainfluenza virus expressing the SARS 

coronavirus spike protein for the prevention of SARS. Lancet 2004;363:2122-7. 

157. 

Song Z, Xu Y, Bao L et al. From SARS to MERS, Thrusting Coronaviruses into the Spotlight. Viruses 

158. 

Shang W, Yang Y, Rao Y, Rao X. The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia calls for viral vaccines. 

2019;11. 

NPJ Vaccines 2020;5:18. 

 

56 

159.  Ura T, Okuda K, Shimada M. Developments in Viral Vector-Based Vaccines. Vaccines (Basel) 

2014;2:624-41. 

160. 

Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R et al. Fair Allocation of Scarce Medical Resources in the Time of 

Covid-19. The New England journal of medicine 2020. 

161. 

SIAARTI. Clinical Ethics Recommendations For the Allocation of Intensive Care Treatments, in 

exceptional, Resource-Limited Circumstances. 2020. 

162. 

Crisis Standards of Care: A Systems Framework for Catastrophic Disaster Response. Washington 

163. 

Biddison LD, Berkowitz KA, Courtney B et al. Ethical considerations: care of the critically ill and 

injured during pandemics and disasters: CHEST consensus statement. Chest 2014;146:e145S-

(DC), 2012. 

55S. 

164. 

Truog RD, Mitchell C, Daley GQ. The Toughest Triage - Allocating Ventilators in a Pandemic. The 

New England journal of medicine 2020. 

165. 

Shahpori R, Stelfox HT, Doig CJ, Boiteau PJ, Zygun DA. Sequential Organ Failure Assessment in 

H1N1 pandemic planning. Critical care medicine 2011;39:827-32. 

166. 

Khan Z, Hulme J, Sherwood N. An assessment of the validity of SOFA score based triage in H1N1 

critically ill patients during an influenza pandemic. Anaesthesia 2009;64:1283-8. 

 

57 

 

 

 

Figure 1: 

 

 

 

 

 

  

58 

ACE2 ReceptorSpike (S)Membrane (M)Envelope (E)Nucleocapsid (N)RNATMPRSS2Neutralizing(cid:9)AbExocytosis &Virion ReleaseSARS-CoV2BindingEndocytosisEndosome Maturationand Host/Viral Membrane FusionSARS-CoV2 mRNATranslation by HostMachineryProteolysisSARS-CoV2ProteasesSARS-CoV2ReplicaseRdRpChloroquine,(cid:9)Hydroxychloroquine(cid:9)&TMPRSS2(cid:9)Inhibitors(cid:9)(Camstat)Protease(cid:9)InhibitorsNucleoside(cid:9)Analogs(Remdesivir)Host NucleusSARS-CoV2Structural ProteinsRNA Replicationby RdRpHost Endoplasmic Reticulum &Golgi ApparatusViral AssemblyDecoy(cid:9)Protein(cid:9)orMolecule(Soluble(cid:9)ACE2)ExtracellularIntracellularSARS-CoV2Exposure to Host CellJAK-2(cid:9)InhibitorsSoluble ACE2Figure 2:  

    

 

 

59 

Direct(cid:9)Viral(cid:9)Cardiomyocyte(cid:9)ToxicityMyocardial(cid:9)InjuryMicrovascularDysfunctionVasculitis/Vascular(cid:9)Endothelial(cid:9)InjuryHyperinflammatoryStateEpicardial(cid:9)plaque(cid:9)rupture(cid:9)(Type(cid:9)1(cid:9)MI)Oxygen(cid:9)supply/demand(cid:9)mismatch(cid:9)(Type(cid:9)2(cid:9)MI)Hypotension↑Metabolic(cid:9)demandsHypoxiaPre-existingASCVD++++Stress(cid:9)CardiomyopathyDIC/Microthrombi++++Envelope (E) 

Spike (S) 

RNA 

Membrane (M) 

TMPRSS2 

SARS-CoV2 
Exposure to Host Cell 

Nucleocapsid (N) 

Neutralizing 
Ab 

SARS-CoV2 
Binding 
ACE2 Receptor 

Decoy Protein or 
Molecule 
(Soluble ACE2) 

Soluble  
ACE2 

Exocytosis & 
Virion Release 

Extracellular 

Intracellular 

Endocytosis 

JAK-2 Inhibitors 

Protease Inhibitors 

SARS-CoV2 
Proteases 

Proteolysis 

SARS-CoV2 
Replicase 

Translation by Host 
Machinery 

RdRp 

RNA Replication 
by RdRp 

Nucleoside  
Analogs 
(Remdesivir) 

Viral Assembly 

SARS-CoV2 mRNA 

SARS-CoV2 
Structural Proteins 

Host Nucleus 

Host Endoplasmic Reticulum & 
Golgi Apparatus 

Endosome Maturation 
and Host/Viral  
Membrane Fusion 

Chloroquine,  
Hydroxychloroquine & 
TMPRSS2 Inhibitors (Camstat) 
  

Hypotension 

Direct Viral 
Cardiomyocyte Toxicity 

↑Metabolic 
demands 

Oxygen supply/demand 
mismatch (Type 2 MI) 

Hypoxia 

++ 

Pre-existing 
ASCVD 

++ 

Epicardial plaque 
rupture (Type 1 MI) 

Myocardial 
Injury 

DIC/ 
Microthrombi 

Vasculitis/ 
Vascular Endothelial 
Injury 

Microvascular 
Dysfunction 

Stress 
Cardiomyopathy 

++ 

++ 

Hyperinflammatory 
State 

