Clin Exp Emerg Med 2020 Apr 16
https://doi.org/10.15441/ceem.20.032
Epub ahead of print

eISSN: 2383-4625

C
o
m
m
e
n
t
a
r
y

Received: 31 March 2020 
Revised: 8 April 2020
Accepted: 13 April 2020

Correspondence to: Sangchun Choi
Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Ajou University School of Medicine,  
164 Worldcup-ro Yeongtong-gu, 
Suwon 16499, Korea
E-mail: avenue59@ajou.ac.kr
ORCID 
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2271-3434

Innovative screening tests for 
COVID-19 in South Korea
Sangchun Choi1, Chul Han2, Jisook Lee1, Sang-Il Kim3, In Byung Kim4
1Department of Emergency Medicine, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea
2Department of Emergency Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Shool of Medicine, Seoul, Korea
3Department. of Oncology & Hematology, H Plus Yangji General Hospital, Seoul, Korea
4Department of Emergency Medicine, Myongji Medical Foundation Myongji Hospital, Goyang, Korea

Recently, the number of Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases has increased remarkably 
in South Korea, so the triage clinics and emergency departments (ED) are expected to be over-
crowded with patients with presumed infection. As of March 21st, there was a total of 8,799 
confirmed cases of COVID-19 and 102 related deaths in South Korea that was one of the top 
countries with high incidence rates.1 This sharp increase in infection is associated with 1) out-
breaks in individual provinces, 2) deployment of rapid and aggressive screening tests, 3) dedicat-
ed healthcare staffs for virus screening tests, 4) quarantine inspection data transparency and 
accurate data reporting, and 5) public health lessons from previous Severe Acute Respiratory 
Syndrome (SARS) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) outbreaks. This commentary 
introduces innovative screening tests that are currently used in South Korea for COVID-19, e.g., 
Drive-Through and Walk-Through tests, and compare the advantages and disadvantages of both 
methods. 

Keywords Infectious Disease Outbreak, Virus Diseases, Early Detection of Disease, COVID-19 di-
agnostic testing

Drive-Through (DT) and Walk-Through (WT) tests are designed to provide a rapid screening, have 
a minimal risk of infection, and reduce excessive use of medical supplies like personal protective 
equipment (PPE).2 The risk of infection may be reduced by limiting the exposure of testees or di-
rect contacts between the testees and healthcare workers. The DT tests are generally conducted 
in large low-traffic areas, such as public parking or stadium parking lots.2,3 On the other hand, 
the WT tests can be performed in a clean testing booth that can be installed near the hospital. 
Table 1 shows the pros and cons of DT and WT testing for COVID-19. 

DRIVE-THROUGH (DT) TESTING FOR COVID-19

Testing for COVID-19 can be performed at a drive-through site, as shown in Figure 1. The driver/
testee can stay inside his car during the entire process (< 15 min), consisting of multiple steps: 
patient registration (3-4 min), medical examination (2 min), specimen collection (2 min), dis-
charge instructions (2 min), and payment for testing service (2 min). Healthcare workers are sup-
posed to wear the level-D PPE that is composed of inner and outer gloves, a gown (hooded cov-
erall), an N95 mask (respirator), goggles (eye shield) or a face shield, and safety shoes or boots. 
Depending on the required contact level with patients or the availability of medical supply re-
sources, healthcare staff may use PPE after modifying it, following the facility guidelines.4 

How to cite this article:

Choi S, Han C, Lee J, Kim SI, Kim IB. 
Innovative Screening Tests for COVID-19 in 
South Korea. Clin Exp Emerg Med 2020 Apr 
16. https://doi.org/10.15441/ceem.20.032

This is an Open Access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-Commercial License (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/).

Copyright © 2020 The Korean Society of Emergency Medicine

1

Table 1. Pros and cons of Drive-through (DT) and Walk-through (WT) test for COVID-19

DT testing

WT testing

Pros 

• Efficiency
   - Testing can be completed within 15 min. 
• Privacy protection
   - The testee remains in his/her car during the entire process. 
• Reduced risk of infection 
   - Tests are conducted outdoors.
   - The car provides isolation to the testee. 
• No additional equipment
   -  There is no need for an extra isolation room or negative pres-

sure room.

Innovative screening tests for COVID-19 in South Korea

Negative pressure booth type

Positive pressure booth type

• Efficiency
   - Testing can be completed in about 20 min. 
• Reduced risk of infection 
   -  Disinfection and ventilation of the booth should  
be done after every use, and it can be done with 
relative ease.

• Efficiency
   -  Testing can be completed in about  

15 min. 

• Reduced risk of infection 
   -  No need for disinfection and ventila-

tion of the booth

   -  Healthcare staffs don’t make any direct contact 

   -  Healthcare staffs don’t make any di-

with the testees.

• Prevent excessive use of medical supplies 
   -  The booth walls separate healthcare staff from  

plies 

rect contact with the testees.
• Prevent excessive use of medical sup-

testees, so the use of medical supplies is reduced. 

• Reduced workload
   -  The workload for conducting the WT tests is less 

than the DT tests. 
• Robustness of method
   -  The booth is installed close or next to the hospital 
unit, so testing is less likely to be affected by  
adverse weather conditions. 

   -  The booth walls separate healthcare 
staff from testees, so the use of 
medical supplies is reduced. 

• Reduced workload
   -  The workload for conducting the WT 

tests is less than the DT test. 

• Test more patients
   -  Testing service is accessible even to 

• Test more patients
   -  Testing service is accessible even to non-drivers.
   -  It is possible to test multiple patients at once using 

more than one clean booth.

non-drivers.

   -  It is possible to test multiple patients 
at once using more than one clean 
booth.

• Medical consumerism
   -  A patient may get tested at multiple testing sites, 
which can be seen as promoting medical consum-
erism.

• Medical consumerism
   -  A patient may get tested at multiple 
testing sites, which can be seen as 
promoting medical consumerism.

• Risk of infection
   -  The risk of infection exists for the testees while  
he/she is waiting for the test in a reception area, 
especially if overcrowded.

• Risk of infection
   -  The risk of infection exists for 

healthcare staff for any equipment 
failure, such as when the gloves tear.

   -  The risk of infection exists for healthcare staff for 
any kind of equipment failures, such as glove tears 
or perforation.

• Adverse weather conditions 
   -  Adverse weather conditions may 
complicate outdoors testing.

Cons 

• Medical consumerism
   -  A patient may get tested at multiple testing sites, which can 

be seen as promoting medical consumerism.

• Additionally required supports 
   -  Healthcare staffs will benefit from a support person who helps 

with writing orders and filling out medical records.

   -  The testing site should be in the areas that are less populated 

but close enough to the hospital for future follow-up. 

• Worker fatigue
   -  Healthcare staff fatigue due to excessive workload. Working 
outdoors  > 2 hours wearing the high-level PPE can tire the 
staff to the level of fatigue, so taking frequent breaks is rec-
ommended.6 
• Risk of infection
   -  The risk of infection exists related to possible handling  

errors of samples.

   -  Healthcare staff may lose attention when changing gowns or 

gloves due to fatigue.
• Testing capacity limitations
   -  Non-drivers cannot use the testing service.
   -  Cross-infection may occur between the driver and the pas-
senger, so only one person/driver at a time should be tested 
per vehicle.

• Adverse weather conditions 
   -  Adverse weather conditions may complicate outdoors testing.
• Cost
   -  The initial cost of the installation of a test site can be rela-

tively high.

2

www.ceemjournal.org 

Sangchun Choi, et al.

Fig. 1. The Drive-through (DT) testing site.

1) Registration: Healthcare staff assists the check-in process.
2)  Medical exam: Healthcare staff records testee’s symptoms, personal information, and epidemiologic association. The staff completes this process 
using a mobile phone without making contact with the testee. If the testee is suspected of coronavirus infection, his/her samples are collected before 
he/she gets transferred to a designated hospital.

3)  Collection of specimens: Healthcare staff leans over the open window for naso- and oro-pharyngeal swabs, and then the testee closes his/her car win-
dows to collect his/her sputum specimen. Car ventilation is set at the “recirculation” mode to minimize the risk of infection for healthcare workers. 
After receiving the samples, the healthcare staff puts on a new vinyl apron and disinfects his/her hands using alcohol-based hand sanitizer. 

4)  Discharge instructions: The testee gets the information about how to check the test result and is asked to self-quarantine until further notice 

regarding the outcome. Instructions are also provided regarding what the testee should do if his/her symptoms get worse.

WALK-THROUGH (WT) TESTING FOR  
COVID-19

Testing for COVID-19 can be performed at a walking-through 
site, as shown in Figure 2.

Negative pressure booth 
In the WT test using a negative pressure booth, the testee stays 
inside the disinfected booth, while the healthcare worker is out-
side the booth, disallowing a direct contact between the two. The 
clean booth is designed to enclose the testee with transparent 
walls and a pair of gloves on one wall for healthcare staff to use 
when collecting patient samples and examining the patient. Be-
fore the test, healthcare staff is required to put on the PPE con-
sisting of a pair of gloves, a gown, and a disposable face mask. 

The PPE can be adjusted to follow the facility guidelines or ac-
cording to the availability of medical supply resources. The whole 
testing process, from registration to payment, can be completed 
in about 20 minutes. 

Positive pressure booth 
The WT test using a positive pressure booth combines the advantages 
of the DT test and the WT test using a negative pressure booth. The 
tester stays inside the booth while the testee stays outside; thus, di-
rect contact between the two is avoided (Fig. 3). The positive pressure 
booth looks similar to the negative pressure booth. Positive pressure 
inside the booth is used to prevent contaminants from coming inside 
the booth. The testing process is similar but shorter (< 10 min) since 
it is unnecessary to disinfect the booth after each test. 

Clin Exp Emerg Med 2020 Apr 16

3

Innovative screening tests for COVID-19 in South Korea

Fig. 2. The Walk-through (WT) test using the negative pressure booth. (Top) Flow diagram of the testing, and (Bottom) a picture of four “safe assessment 
and fast evaluation technical booths.”

1  & 2) Patient registration and waiting in the reception area: A one-stop kiosk assists the check-in process, reducing the risk of infection for both the 

3)  Patient exam: Healthcare staff records testee’s symptoms, personal information, and epidemiologic association. The staff can complete this process 

healthcare staff and the testee. 

using a mobile phone or a Personal Computer (PC) system.

4)  Collection of specimens and discharge instructions: The testee enters the clean booth once the check-in process is complete. The testee stays inside 
the negative pressure booth, while the healthcare staff is outside the booth the whole time. The booth was designed with transparent walls, one of 
which has a pair of long gloves for a healthcare worker to use to make naso- and oro-pharyngeal swabs. The testee collects the sputum sample by 
himself/herself in the closed booth. The testee then receives information about how to check the test result and how to self-quarantine. Instructions 
are also provided regarding what the testee should do if his/her symptoms get worse. After the exit of the testee, the booth gets ventilated and disin-
fected for 2 minutes the first time and 10 minutes after that. 

4

www.ceemjournal.org 

Sangchun Choi, et al.

Fig. 3. The Walk-through (WT) test using the positive pressure booth.7 

1)  Medical exam: Healthcare staff records testee’s symptoms, personal 
information, and epidemiologic association. The booth is installed in a 
tent or a container house separated from the hospital. The staff can 
complete this process using a mobile phone without making contact 
with the testees. If the testee is suspected of coronavirus infection, 
his/her samples are collected before he/she gets transferred to a desig-
nated hospital.

2)  Collection of specimens: The tester enters into the positive pressure 
booth and stays inside, while the testee is outside. The booth is designed 
with transparent walls, one of which has a pair of long gloves for a 
healthcare worker to use to make naso- and oro-pharyngeal swabs. The 
testee collects the sputum sample by himself/herself outside the 
booth. 

3)  Discharge instructions: The testee receives the information about 
how to check the testing result and is asked to self-quarantine until 
further notice regarding the outcome. Instructions are also provided 
regarding what the testee should do if his/her symptoms get worse.

  Pandemics caused by viruses have tended to break out once 
every decade or every other decade over the past 300 years.5 Now, 
they may be occurring more often and in more variable cycles. 
Successful management of viral infection and diseases requires 
quarantine and treatment of those who may have an infection. 
Thus, early-stage screening tests that are efficient and effective 
are essential for preventing the virus from spreading widely. Each 
step of the testing process should be completed quickly and mini-
mize the existing risk of infection for healthcare workers and tes-
tees alike, meeting the general safety requirements. 
 
In this commentary, we introduce innovative screening testing 
that has been successfully applied to the COVID-19 outbreak in 
South Korea. Although the efficacy of the methods should be fur-
ther clarified, we believe that our experience with a successful 
implementation of these tests for COVID-19 may apply to other 
countries. 

REFERENCES

1. Korean Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Current 
statistics of COVID-19 in Korea. http://ncov.mohw.go.kr/bdBoard-
List_Real.do?brdId = 1&brdGubun = 13&ncvContSeq = &contS
eq = &board_id = &gubun = . Updated 2020. Accessed March 
21, 2020.

2. Weiss EA, Ngo J, Gilbert GH, Quinn JV. Drive-through medi-
cine: a novel proposal for rapid evaluation of patients during 
an influenza pandemic. Ann Emerg Med 2010;55:268-73.
3. Kwon KT, Ko JH, Shin H, Sung M, Kim JY. Drive-Through Screen-
ing Center for COVID-19: a Safe and Efficient Screening Sys-
tem against Massive Community Outbreak. measures. J Kore-
an Med Sci 2020;35:e123.

4. World Health Organization. Rational use of personal protec-
tive equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). In-
terim guiance 27 February 2020. https://apps.who.int/iris/bit-
stream/handle/10665/331215/WHO-2019-nCov-IPCPPE_use-
2020.1-eng.pdf. Updated 2020. Accessed March 21, 2020.
5. Gust ID, Hampson AW, Lavanchy D. Planning for the next pan-

demic of influenza. Rev Med Virol 2001;11:59-70.

6. Radonovich LJ Jr, Cheng J, Shenal BV, Hodgson M, Bender BS. 
Respirator tolerance in health care workers. JAMA 2009;301(1): 
36-8.

7. Song B. Evolving COVID-19 Sampling... ‘Super-speed Walking 
Through Test’ Came Out [Internet]. Joongang Ilbo; 2020 [cited 
2020 Mar 31]. Available from: https://news.joins.com/article/ 
23743568.

Clin Exp Emerg Med 2020 Apr 16

5

