Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease 2020; volume 90:1315

                                

COVID-19 pandemic: what consequences for cardiac rehabilitation?

Carlo Vigorito1, Pompilio Faggiano2, Gian Francesco Mureddu3
1University of Naples Federico II; 2Spedali Civili, Brescia; 3S. Giovanni-Addolorata Hospital, Rome, Italy

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic spreading all around the
world has stressed over its capabilities and determined profound
changes  in  the  health  systems  in  all  countries  and  has  caused
hundreds of thousand deaths. Health professionals have been called
to  a  tremendous  effort  to  deal  with  this  emergency,  often
contaminating or succumbing themselves to the disease.

Patients with pre-existing cardiovascular disease infected with
COVID-19  have  an  increased  risk  of  severe  disease  and  worse
outcome, including death. Patients with COVID-19 infections have
profound involvement not only of the pulmonary system, but also
variegate involvement of other organs (multi organ failure, MOF),
particularly  of  cardiovascular  system  (mainly  through  acute
hypoxic  myocardial  injury,  myocarditis,  arterial  and  venous
thromboembolism) [1]. Intensive or sub-intensive care units have
carried  the  greatest  load,  but  several  hospital  wards  have  been
reconverted  to  COVID  units,  particularly  internal  medicine  or
specialties, like cardiology or pneumology, to face the growing
wave of the disease. 

This revolutionary transformation has had a strong implication
for  cardiology.  Many  cardiology  units  or  Coronary  Care  Units
(CCU) have been downsized and induced to allocate dedicated
space  and  personnel  to  emergency  COVID  units  or  ICU.  But
COVID-19  storm  has  also  had  a  deep  impact  for  cardiac
rehabilitation (CR): some CR units have been closed and medical
or nurse staff moved to COVID units, others have seen a reduction
of  beds  or  staff,  thus  limiting  their  operative  capabilities.  To
understand how Italian CR units are being re-modulated in this
pandemia,  the  Italian  Association  of  Cardiac  Prevention  and
Rehabilitation  (IACPR)  has  launched  an  online  survey  on  the
impact of COVID-19 on their activity, whose results will be the
basis  for  prospecting  different  actions  at  national  level  and  to
understand the best way to reorganize the activities during and after
the  storm  of  the  disease  [2].  COVID-19  has  had  profound
implications  on  the  organization  of  CR  also  in  other  European
countries,  in  many  cases  reducing  or  stopping  CR  programs
(Hansen D, and Wilhelm M, personal communications). 

Received for publication: 14 April 2020.
Accepted for publication: 14 April 2020.

©Copyright: the Author(s), 2020
Licensee PAGEPress, Italy
Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease 2020; 90:1315
doi: 10.4081/monaldi.2020.1315

This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License (by-nc 4.0) which permits any
noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

Still operative CR units have to adapt their organization and
programs according to the local health systems and to the different
burden of the disease, with many differences among Italian regions.
IACPR  has  issued  general  recommendations  for  CR  activities
during COVID-19 pandemia [3]. In general, active CR centers have
seen in these days a reduced referral to residential CR from the
traditional  prevalent  source  (cardiac  surgery,  PTCA  or  other
planned interventions usually referred to CR such as Pacemaker,
ICD/CRT implantations), since all these elective activities have
been postponed in large part. As far as Phase 2 outpatients CR,
many elective in-hospital activities or outpatient sessions or visits
have been postponed in the last 2 months. In addition, reduction of
ACS admissions to CCU has occurred, since many patients refuse
hospitalization or do not reach the hospital in time, or die at home.
While the total admission to CCU has been largely reduced, the
proportion of STEMI vs NSTEMI has increased, indicating that
only  the  worse ACS  patients,  those  with  worse  symptoms,  are
reaching the hospital, while many patients with fewer symptoms
prefer to stay at home. Similarly, many heart failure (HF) patients
avoid hospital admission even if the clinical status is worsening.
However, In those patients who are referred and admitted to CR,
the organization, provision and delivery of rehabilitative programs
must  be  remodulated  in  COVID-19  era,  according  to  the
recommendations recently issued by the CR section of European
Association  of  Preventive  Cardiology  (EAPC)  [4].  The  more
relevant of these recommendations are establishing priorities for
referral  to  CR,  increase  patients  turnover,  adopt  appropriate
precautions  during  training  (masks,  distancing,  avoid  group
exercises), shorten the programs, keep track of discharged patients
and follow them with remote assessment.

In the medium time scenario, the challenge for CR units will
be to be prepared to face for some time a population of patients at
higher cardiovascular risk than usual: this will be composed of
patients with ACS (STEMI or NSTEMI) or with worsening HF not
hospitalized for the acute event, due to missed diagnosis or patient
refusal.  Many  of  these  patients  may  have  had  reduced  out  of
hospital attention from the practitioner or the specialist, which at
this time are mostly focused on COVID-19 treatment, leading to
inadequate secondary prevention, with poor drug adherence and
traditional  risk  factors  control,  thus  allowing  progression  of
underlying cardiovascular disease. In addition, many ACS patients
may have had a late admission to CCU due temporary shortage of
ambulance  availability,  leading  to  delayed  or  unsuccessful
revascularization. Occasionally, some patients are having systemic
thrombolysis, 
revascularization.
Accordingly, all these circumstances may most likely lead to the
growth of a ACS population resembling that of pre-PTCA era, with
more frequent STEMI, left ventricular systolic dysfunction and/or
HF,  poorer  physical  function  for  longer  inactivity  and  poorer
prognosis. CR strategies and programs should therefore be tailored
on the peculiarities of these patients, who are at higher risk and with
the majority of them being elderly and often frail.

than  percutaneous 

rather 

                          [Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease 2020; 90:1315]                                          [page 205]

Non-commercial use only                             Editorial

In addition, beyond these organizative aspects, there are other
implications of this pandemic on CR. First of all, CR units should
develop  strategies  on  how  to  handle  cardiac  patients  who  have
developed  COVID-19  infection  during  admission  in  medical  or
surgical  units  for ACS,  HF,  cardiac  surgery,  etc.,  and  thereafter
discharged and referred to CR. Of course, strict rules should be
established  for  these  referrals,  that  should  be  reserved  only  to
infected  patients  after  COVID-19  swabs  are  negative  and  chest
imaging recovered, and to those at higher risk, who need residential
CR  for  stabilization  of  an  acute  coronary  event  and  for  whom
immediate return at home may be dangerous. Of interest, while the
acute  cardiovascular  complications  of  COVID-19  infection  are
recognized, 
term  consequences  on
cardiovascular  recovery  after  an  acute  event  are  still  largely
unknown. Coronavirus infection may largely affect cardiovascular
and other systems, and these aspects may complicate the clinical
handling and even the modalities of rehabilitative programs or drug
strategies  in  these  patients. A  closer  link  with  other  specialists
(mainly lung and thrombosis specialists) will allow to face up to
these unprecedented clinical scenarios.

its  medium 

long 

to 

Another side of the coin is how to deal with patients, unlikely
but possible, developing COVID-19 infection during residential CR.
In  this  setting,  CR  Units  should  be  prepared  to  implement  all
protections for health professionals, patients, contact and relatives,
including isolating the infected, stopping rehabilitative program,
and  to  make  difficult  choices  on  the  best  discharge  destination
(home quarantine, cardiology or COVID wards,) depending from
the more severe cardiologic or pneumologic clinical damage. 

In summary, COVID-19 infection outbreak is having, and will
likely have for a long period, a profound impact on CR organization
and  provision  of  CR  programs.  Cardiology  and  Cardiac
Rehabilitation scientific societies should be prepared to face this
new challenge, particularly by re-educating cardiac patients to refer
to  cardiologic  services  in  case  of  worsening  of  the  underlying

disease,  and  reinforcing  the  need  of  maintaining  secondary
prevention despite all difficulties, in order to reduce as much as
possible the negative functional and prognostic impact of COVID-
19 infection in cardiovascular patients. 

References

1. Huang  C,  Wang Y,  Li  X,  et  al.  Clinical  features  of  patients
infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet
2020;395:497-506.
2. Italian  Association 

for  Cardiovascular  Prevention  and
Rehabilitation (AICPR). Survey on the impact of the Covid-19
pandemic on the activities of the Cardiac Rehabilitation Centers
in Italy. Available from: https://forms.office.com/Pages/Response
Page.aspx?id=bID-cE2T2E2SHNVefPPPiHDQ81J5XqVOnn
KORzuh9WdUMFNQQlVBTllBQlpYMUlRUTJBWUQ4WDk
zWC4u

3. Italian  Association 

for  Cardiovascular  Prevention  and
Rehabilitation (AICPR). [Raccomandazioni AICPR per le attività
di cardiologia riabilitativa e preventiva nella fase di emergenza
pandemica da COVID-19].[in Italian]. Available from: http://
www.iacpr.it/uploaded_images/areacovid/RACCOMANDAZIO
NI_AICPR_PER_LE_ATTIVITA_DI_CARDIOLOGIA.pdf 
4. European Society of Cardiology [Internet]. Recommendations on
how  to  provide  cardiac  rehabilitation  activities  during  the
COVID-19 pandemic. Released by: Secondary Prevention and
Rehabilitation Section of the European Association of Preventive
Cardiology  (EAPC),  April  7,  2020.  Available  from:  https://
www.escardio.org/Education/Practice-Tools/CVD-prevention-
toolbox/recommendations-on-how-to-provide-cardiac-rehabi
litation-activities-during-the-c 

[page 206]                                           [Monaldi Archives for Chest Disease 2020; 90:1315]                          

Non-commercial use only