Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Infectious Disease Modelling

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . k e a i p u b l i s h i n g . c o m / i d m

Propagation analysis and prediction of the COVID-19

Lixiang Li a, Zihang Yang a, Zhongkai Dang a, Cui Meng a, Jingze Huang a,
Haotian Meng a, Deyu Wang a, Guanhua Chen a, Jiaxuan Zhang a,
Haipeng Peng a, *
a Information Security Center, State Key Laboratory of Networking and Switching Technology, Beijing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Beijing, 100876, China
b State Key Laboratory of Infectious Disease Prevention and Control, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (China CDC),
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Beijing, China

, Yiming Shao b, **

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Based on the ofﬁcial data modeling, this paper studies the transmission process of the
Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). The error between the model and the ofﬁcial data
curve is quite small. At the same time, it realized forward prediction and backward
inference of the epidemic situation, and the relevant analysis help relevant countries to
make decisions.

© 2020 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi
Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Article history:
Received 21 March 2020
Accepted 27 March 2020
Available online 31 March 2020
Handling Editor: Dr. J Wu

Keywords:
COVID-19
Short-term forecast
Epidemic control

1. Introduction

At the end of 2019, the new coronavirus (COVID-19) spread widely in China, and a large number of people became infected.
At present, the domestic outbreak has been effectively controlled, while the new coronavirus is spreading rapidly in other
areas. Currently, Europe has become the center of the current outbreak of new pneumonia. Meanwhile, on March 11, the
World Health Organization (WHO) declared a new pneumonia outbreak a "global pandemic." The new coronavirus has
caused a great threat to the health and safety of people all over the world due to its amazing spreading power and potential
harm. The research on the domestic and international epidemics and the future development trend has become a hot topic of
current research. At present, many teams have studied the transmission law and preventive measures of the COVID-19
(Corman et al., 2020; Hui et al., 2020; Rothe et al., 2020), and many meaningful results have been obtained (Mizumoto &
Chowell, 2020; Riou & Althaus, 2020; Shao & Wu, 2020).

According to the transmission characteristics of epidemic at different stages, this paper uses Gaussian distribution theory
to construct a new model of coronavirus transmission. By simulating the propagation process of the COVID-19, we found that
the curves of proposed model well simulate the ofﬁcial data curves of Hubei, Non-Hubei area of China and also South Korea,
Italy, and Iran. The study points out the key factors that affect the spread of the virus, such as the basic reproduction number,

* Corresponding author.
** Corresponding author.

E-mail addresses: penghaipeng@bupt.edu.cn (H. Peng), yshao@bjmu.edu.cn (Y. Shao).

Peer review under responsibility of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.03.002
2468-0427/© 2020 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the
CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

283

virus incubation period, and daily infection number. At the same time, we predict the development trend of epidemics in
different regions and infer the time of the initial cases. Furthermore, we analyzed the impact of different control times on the
spread of the epidemic. Relevant models and data analysis can provide some basis and guidance for the related countries
about epidemic prevention and control.

The main contributions of this paper can answer the following 11 questions and be summarized as:

✓ Epidemic situation in Hubei Province of China:

1). When will more than 10,000 conﬁrmed coronavirus cases be completely cured in Hubei ?

The model predicts that almost all cases will be cured before April 1 (Fig. 1).

2). When was the earliest case in Hubei?

We ﬁnd that there was already infections on November 24 (Fig. 2).

3). How many people are infected per person (Basic reproduction number)?

It is 3.8 when not under control, 0.5 after closing Wuhan city and 0.1 after closing of Wuhan community (Fig. 3).

4). What is the average incubation period of the virus?

6 days (Fig. 4).

5). If it is controlled 5 days in advance, how much is the infection? What if control is lagging 5 days?

If 5 days in advance, the number of infected people will be 28,000, 42% of the current number of conﬁrmed cases. If the
control is delayed for 5 days, it will reach 156,000 people, 2.26 times of the current level. (68,000 in Hubei at March 13)
(Fig. 5).

6). What distribution does the daily infection curve satisfy, which day reaches the peak, is February 12?

Fig. 1. The comparison between the ofﬁcial epidemic data and simulation data of Hubei Province (The curve a - Number of simulated infections. The curve b -
Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed infections. The curve c - Number of simulated cures. The curve d - Number of ofﬁcially cures. The curve e - Number of simulated
deaths. The curve f- Number of ofﬁcially deaths.) There are three stages in the simulation. The ﬁrst stage is before January 23, when Wuhan is not closed; the
second stage is from January 23 to February 10; the third stage is after February 10, when Wuhan starts to close the community.

284

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

Fig. 2. Backward graph of initial epidemic curve.

Fig. 3. Comparison of the basic reproduction number. (The basic reproduction number a ¼ 3, b ¼ 3.5, c ¼ 3.7, d ¼ 3.8, f ¼ 3.9, g ¼ 4.1, h ¼ 4.6, respectively. The
curve e - Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed infections.)

The distribution satisfy Normal distribution, the actual peak appeared on February 8. In the ofﬁcial data, because the
clinical diagnosis was not added before the February 12, the data surged on the February 12 (jump to 14,840 people, cu-
mulative results), indicating that the previously published data did not reﬂect the actual infection situation in Hubei (Fig. 6).

7). The average number of days from diagnosis to cure?

In the stage of Hubei epidemic, it takes an average of 21 days for patients from diagnosis to cure (Fig. 1).

✓ Epidemic situation in non-Hubei areas of China:

8). What is the law of transmission in non-Hubei areas?

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

285

Fig. 4. Comparison of the average latency. (The average latency a ¼ 3, b ¼ 5, c ¼ 6, e ¼ 7, f ¼ 9, respectively. The curve d - Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed
infections.)

Fig. 5. Comparison of epidemic control at different times (The curve a - 5 days in advance. The curve b - Control by actual days. The curve c - Number of ofﬁcially
conﬁrmed infections. The curve d - 5 days delayed.).

The epidemic transmission curve of non-Hubei area is similar to that of Hubei area, which was controlled 10 days in

advance (on January 13). (Fig. 7).

✓ International epidemic situation except China

9). How to predict the epidemic situation in South Korea?

286

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

Fig. 6. Change curve of daily new infections. (The curve a - Simulated curve. The curve b - Smoothed curve. The curve c - Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed
infections.)

Fig. 7. Correlation analysis of epidemic data in non-Hubei area (The curve a - Simulated number of non-Hubei infections, the curve b - Actual number of non-
Hubei conﬁrmed cases, the curve c - Number of simulated infections in Hubei when control was ten days in advance).

At present, the epidemic situation in South Korea is basically under control. According to the model, South Korea will be
basically under control by the end of March. It was found on January 7 that there was infection in South Korea (conﬁrmed by
ofﬁcial broadcast January 20. In addition, we found that the basic reproduction number before the control was 4.2 in Korea
and 0.1 after the control (Fig. 8).

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

287

Fig. 8. Comparison of Korean epidemic simulation data and ofﬁcial data. (The curve a-Number of simulated infections. The curve b-Number of ofﬁcially
conﬁrmed infections.)

In March 13, 15,000 people in Italy are infected. If not controlled, it will increase dramatically. It will reach 250,000 by the
end of March. In fact, Italy began to control on March 8. According to China’s basic reproduction number 0.5 (when city is
closed), it will reach 100,000 by the end of March. The basic reproduction number in Italy is 3.8 before control. According to
the model inversion, the infection was found on January 10 in Italy (2 cases were conﬁrmed by the ofﬁcial broadcast January
31). (Fig. 9).

In March 13, 11,000 people are infected in Iran. Our model predicts that it will reach 33,000 people at the end of March,
through backward inference of the epidemic situation, we found that Iran had an infection on January 11 (ofﬁcially reporting
that two cases died on February 20, and there was no ofﬁcial data before). The model found that the basic reproduction
number in Iran before the control was 3.8 (Fig. 10).

Fig. 9. Comparison of Italy epidemic simulation data and ofﬁcial data. (The curve a-Number of simulated infections (uncontrol). The curve b-Number of simulated
infections (partial control). The curve c-Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed infections.).

288

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

Fig. 10. Comparison of Iran epidemic simulation data and ofﬁcial data. (The curve a-Number of simulated infections. The curve b-Number of ofﬁcially conﬁrmed
infections.)

2. Speciﬁc analysis of the epidemic situation model

The epidemic data of Hubei Province is large (http://wjw.hubei.gov.cn/), more in line with the statistical law, and the
statistical model is more able to reﬂect the process of virus transmission, so we build a statistical model for the epidemic
situation of Hubei Province (see the method section later for details). Based on the data provided by National Health Com-
mission of China (NHCC), we have carried out accurate simulation. By comparing the simulation results with the real data, we
analyze the propagation process and its inﬂuencing factors.

2.1. Simulation comparison of epidemic model in Hubei Province

According to the comparison between the ofﬁcial epidemic data and simulation data of Hubei Province (see Fig. 1 for
details), we can see that the model simulation curve of the number of conﬁrmed infections, the number of cured people and
the number of dead people matches the ofﬁcial data curve very well. According to the curve of simulated number of infected
persons and the curve of ofﬁcial number of infected persons, we can see that there is a certain gap between the number of
infected persons before February 12, and the others are basically the same. (after the ofﬁcial announced the method of clinical
diagnosis of pneumonia on February 12, the data on that day surged to 14,000, indicating that the ofﬁcial data had some
omissions before February 12, and our model give a more accurate response to the number of actual cases).

2.2. Simulation of the number of infected people

According to the curve of simulated infection number, we infer that by the end of March (yellow line þ light blue
line ¼ dark blue line: Number of simulated cures þ Number of simulated deaths ¼ Number of simulated infections), all cases
will be basically treated, that is to say, more than 10,000 cases in Hubei will be basically cured and cleared. Note: the number
of cases of infection on December 24 is not zero. Because the data in Fig. 1 is too large, small data cannot be displayed. For this
reason, according to the same distribution curve, we also give the simulation data results before December 24, and the
simulation found that the initial infected people had existed as early as November 24 (see Fig. 2 for details). The ﬁrst
conﬁrmed infection was reported on December 8 (http://www.stdaily.com/).

2.3. Simulation of the number of the average infected people

The basic regeneration number has a great inﬂuence on the spread of the outbreak. As the number of basic regeneration
increases, the total number of people infected will also increase; and the greater the number of basic regeneration, the faster
the disease will spread. As in the previous simulation, there are three phases. The ﬁrst phase is an uncontrolled phase.
Through a large number of simulations, we found that the basic regeneration number is 3.8, and the second and third phases
are controlled phases. The basic regeneration numbers are respectively It is 0.5 and 0.1 (see the yellow line in Fig. 3). The
simulated curve (yellow line) can be closer to the ofﬁcial diagnosis curve (red line) in Hubei. The ﬁrst stage is the free
propagation stage, and we also give other simulation results of the basic regeneration number in the range of 3e4.6 (the

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

289

second and third stages remain unchanged). The effect of transmission is signiﬁcant, with the most accurate ﬁnal infections
being obtained only at 3.8. As for the basic regeneration number in the stage of free propagation, some scholars have proposed
that it should be between (2.8,3.9) or (3.6,7.4) (Read et al., 2020). Obviously, these expressions are either inaccurate or too
wide.

2.4. Simulation of the average latency

Fig. 4 shows the comparison chart of the average incubation period. We simulated the days in the range of 3e9 respec-
tively, and found that when the average incubation period was set to 6 days, it could better ﬁt the ofﬁcial curve, while the
other simulated values are quite different from the ofﬁcial curves. It is also found that the shorter the incubation period, the
faster the virus spreads and the greater the total number of infections. David mentioned that the incubation period of the
virus is 3e6 days, which is not accurate.

According to the previous analysis, the disease develops on average after 6 days of incubation, and it takes an average of 5
days from the morbidity to the diagnosis (data from CHCC) (http://www.labour-daily.cn), that is, 5 þ 6 ¼ 11 days from the
initial infection and incubation to the diagnosis and isolation after the morbidity. Obviously, not all 11 days are contagious.
Simulations show that when the average time for contagion is set to 8 days, it ﬁts the ofﬁcial curve best.

2.5. The simulation test of the epidemic control

We know that epidemic control at different times (such as closing city) will have an important impact on the spread of the
epidemic, obviously the earlier the better. Combined with the actual situation of Wuhan’s closure from January 23, we
simulated the comparison of the spread of the epidemic situation on January 18 and January 28, as shown in Fig. 5. The red
curve and the orange curve in the ﬁgure respectively represent the ofﬁcial curve and the simulation curve (when the "cities
were closed" measures were taken on January 23). Obviously, the two curves match well, and the simulated ﬁnal number of
infected people is 69,000, which is also close to the actual situation. If the control is started ﬁve days in advance, that is, on
January 18, the blue line shows that the number of infected people is about 28,000, which is 0.42 times of the number of
conﬁrmed cases. If the measures are delayed for 5 days, it can be seen from the yellow line that the number of people will be
as high as 156,000, about 2.26 times of the current number of patients. Zhong Nanshan’s team once predicted that if the
closure measures were delayed for ﬁve days, the number of patients would reach three times of the current number, i.e.
210000 (Heymann, 2020). Our results are more optimistic. It can be seen from this ﬁgure that it is necessary to take timely
measures to control the spread of the epidemic, which can also be used as a reference for some overseas countries.

2.6. The simulation of daily new infections

We also studied the curve of the daily increase in the number of people (Fig. 6). Because the ofﬁcial did not include the
imaging features of pneumonia in the clinical diagnosis into the diagnosis conditions for statistics before February 12, 2020,
the omission and inaccuracy of the previous data caused the ofﬁcial data to jump on the February 12 (the number of newly
diagnosed patients in Hubei was 14,840 people). As shown in Fig. 6, our simulation data meet the normal distribution, at this
time, the daily new infection data peaked on February 8, with the number of 4500. However, the published data, due to not
timely included in the clinical diagnosis image test (red line), many patients were not diagnosed, but the curve has become a
downward trend, data deviation. For this reason, we smoothed the clinical diagnosis data on February 12, 13 and 14, and used
the Gauss function of latent period. These three days were chosen because of the sudden increase of the number of clinical
diagnosis in these three days. It can be seen from the ﬁgure that the smooth number of ofﬁcial daily infected persons (black
line) and the simulation curve (blue line) ﬁt very well.

3. Data analysis of non-Hubei regions

Due to the large liquidity before the Spring Festival in China, Hubei Province has produced case output. We have also
conducted research on non-Hubei area, which is also divided into three stages: the ﬁrst stage is before January 26 (30
provinces and cities in the country enter the ﬁrst level of combat readiness on January 26), the second stage is from January 26
to February 5 (the whole country starts to close the community in early February, here we take No. 5 for simulation), the third
stage is after February 5. A large number of simulations found that the regeneration numbers in the three stages were 3.8, 0.5,
and 0.1, respectively. At this time, the simulation curve (blue line) and the actual curve (red line) ﬁt well. Another interesting
phenomenon is that we found that if Hubei ’s transmission was controlled 10 days in advance (Hubei began to control on
January 13), its propagation curve (yellow line) is highly similar to the propagation curve in non-Hubei regions.

On January 24th, 235 cases were conﬁrmed in non-Hubei province, with an accumulation of 1052 cases in Hubei province,
accounting for about 20%. Finally, it was ofﬁcially announced that non-Hubei 13,220 and Hubei 67,786 were infected, which
was also basically in line with the proportion of 20%. In other words, there is a high degree of similarity between the initial and
ﬁnal transmission ratios in Hubei and non-Hubei areas.

290

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

4. The prediction of foreign epidemic

4.1. Analysis of Korea data

From March 2, South Korea began to implement large-scale measures to prevent and control the epidemic situation
(https://www.best73.com). At present, the epidemic situation in South Korea is basically under control. Our model simulates
the actual data well, and it is found through model prediction (Fig. 8). That South Korea will be basically controlled by the end
of March. We inferred from the curve and found that there was an infection in South Korea on January 7 (the ofﬁcial broadcast
conﬁrmed the diagnosis at January 20). We found that before the control, the basic reproduction number of virus trans-
mission in Korea was 4.2, and the basic reproduction number after control was 0.1. (The basic reproduction number reached
4.2. We suspect that some churches in South Korea ignored the spread of the epidemic in the early stage.)

4.2. Analysis of Italian data

In March 13, 15,000 people are infected in Italy. Through simulation, we ﬁnd that (Fig. 9), if we do not control (blue line) at
all, it will grow explosively, reaching 250,000 at the end of March. In fact, Italy began to control population ﬂow on March 8.
According to the basic reproduction number (0.5) after China’s city control, our model predicts that by the end of March, the
number of conﬁrmed cases in Italy will reach 100,000 (yellow line). At present, the basic reproduction number in Italy is 3.8.
According to the model inversion, there were infected persons in Italy on January 10 (2 cases were conﬁrmed in Italian ofﬁcial
broadcast January 29 (https://tech.sina.com.cn/)). (The reproduction number reaches 3.8, which is similar to the date of the
early stage in china.)

4.3. Analysis of Iranian data

In March 13, 11,000 people are infected in Iran. According to the simulation, as shown in Fig. 10, the infection data is
expected to reach 33,000 by the end of March, and then it will be basically controlled by the beginning of April. It was found
that Iran had infection on January 11 (Ofﬁcially announced 2 cases died on February 20, no previous ofﬁcial data) (https://
www.huxiu.com/). The model found that the basic reproduction number of virus transmission in Iran before control was
3.8, and the basic reproduction number after control was 1. (the Iranian government took many control measures in early
March. The basic reproduction number after control is 1, indicating that the control effect is not ideal.)

5. Model and description

5.1. Transmission of the virus

Many studies have shown that virological transmission usually satisﬁes the Gaussian distribution, so this article uses the
Gaussian distribution to analyze the transmission of viruses (Yang and Niu, 2018, 2019). When we use Gaussian distribution to
simulate, the main inﬂuence is the average value, but the standard deviation has little inﬂuence, so we will take the best
accord with the objective fact variance to simulate. The basic reproduction number is the number of people infected by a
patient during the average illness period when all are susceptible at the morbidity of the disease. The Gaussian distribution
function of D1 e Nðx1; y1Þ is used to represent the propagation ability of the virus. This formula indicates that a single
infected person can infect (cid:2)1 person on average in the ﬁrst stage. At this stage, (cid:2)1 has a value range of ð1; þ ∞Þ, and a
standard deviation of y1 ¼ 1:5.

With the development of a series of effective measures, the daily increase of the number of infected people also decreased
to a certain extent, and the transmission ability of the disease in the population decreased. For the ability to spread disease
through this process, we still use the Gaussian distribution. When a single infected person at this stage is able to infect an
average of (cid:2)2 individuals, the formula for the capacity to transmit is, D2 e Nðx2; y2Þ. At this stage, the value range of (cid:2)2 is
general ð0; 1(cid:3), standard deviation of (cid:2)2 is y2 ¼ 2*x2. Because the medical condition of affected area and the degree of people’s
activity intention directly decide the basic regeneration number in this stage. The better the health care, the less active the
population, the smaller the (cid:2)2.

In the course of disease transmission, the patient from being infected to the morbidity of disease, we call it incubation
period. We assume that it takes (cid:2)3 days for people to get infected and become aware of the disease, then the incubation
period follows D3eNðx3; y3Þ. In this model x3 ¼ 6:0, the standard deviation y3 ¼ 2:0.

In addition, patients can transmit the virus to other people, so we assume that the average time from infection to
transmission is (cid:2)4 days, which follows D4eNðx4;y4Þ. According to the previous analysis, the disease develops after an average
of six days of incubation, and it takes an average of ﬁve days from morbidity to diagnosis (according to NHCC), that is,
5 þ 6 ¼ 11 days from the initial incubation of infection to post-morbidity isolation. Clearly, not all 11 days are infectious, and
simulations show that setting the average number of infectious days to 8 best ﬁts the ofﬁcial curve. In this model x4 ¼ 8:0,
the standard deviation y4 ¼ 1:5.

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

291

5.2. Cure the discharge process

The cure time of the patient is the difference between the time of hospital discharge and the time of diagnosis, set to (cid:2)5.
During the epidemic period, the cure time of patients was expressed by Gaussian distribution, that is, D5eNðx5; y5Þ, which
means that it takes an average of (cid:2)5 days for a single individual to be cured and discharged from hospital. During the early
and late stages of the epidemic, depending on the medical condition and level of vigilance, there will be small changes to the
(cid:2)5. As the epidemic continued, people’s awareness of self-protection became stronger, and hospital treatment became more
effective in the late stage of the outbreak, the patient’s recovery time became shorter and shorter. In Hubei Province, the
average time from diagnosis to cure was 21 days.

Relative to the spread of previous diseases, the early mortality rate of this disease is also very high, mainly due to the lack
of understanding of the new virus, and secondly, the new crown virus transmission is very strong, leading to the collapse of
the medical system in the epidemic area. Due to the continuous improvement of medical conditions and other reasons, the
mortality rate of the disease has continued to ease. We assume that the mortality rate is (cid:2)6, then the mortality distribution
follows D6eNðx6; y6Þ. The mortality rate will change in stages depending on medical conditions. According to the CHCC,
Hubei Province’s current mortality rate is 4.5 percent.

In this paper, through analyzing the existing data of Hubei epidemic situation, the corresponding model is established, and
then the simulation is carried out. Here, we studied the main factors affecting the spread of COVID-19, such as the number of
basic regenerations, the incubation period and the average number of days of cure. What’s more, we predicted the evolution
trend of the existing epidemic data, and found that imposing controls would have important impact on the epidemic. In
addition, according to the existing data abroad, we also make bold predictions of the epidemic development trends in South
Korea, Italy, and Iran, pointing out the possible outbreaks and the corresponding control time, and tracing the earliest
transmission dates of countries. Finally, we hope that this article can make some contributions to the world’s response to this
epidemic and give some references for future research.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

Acknowledgements

We thank Ping Zhang, Xiaofeng Tao, Jinghua Xiao, Licheng Wang, Ye Tian and Yetao Lu for their helpful comments and
discussions. In addition, we also thank Junying Liang, Chengwei Tong, Jiaxin Shi, Tao Zhou, Jingyu Sun, Yameng Zhang and
Huizhen Li for their contributions in data search. This paper is supported the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant Nos. 61932005, 61771071, 61972051).

5.3. Death toll

6. Conclusion

Appendix

A. Methods

A1. Data

We obtained the data from the NHC of China, 2020. The data information includes the cumulative conﬁrmed cases, the
cumulative number of deaths, newly conﬁrmed cases and the cumulative number of cured cases for Hubei and non-Hubei
provinces from January 26 to March 10. We also used the data on the recent diagnoses in South Korea, Iran, and Italy, it
includes the data from the January 20 (the ﬁrst conﬁrmed diagnosis) to March 13 (the epidemic stabilized) in South Korea, the
data from the January 31 (the ﬁrst conﬁrmed case) to March 20 in Italy and the data from the February 20 (the ﬁrst conﬁrmed
case) to March 20 in Iran, and here, the data comes from ofﬁcial notiﬁcations from various countries.

A2. Parameter estimation process

In different control stages, the Basic reproduction number changes greatly and it affects the intensity of control directly. In
addition, the incubation period of the virus affects the speed of transmission directly. These two parameters need to be
estimated. Current literature shows that the uncontrolled Basic reproduction number ﬂuctuates between [2.8, 7.4] (Read
et al., 2020). Therefore, we chose the valuation range in the corresponding range. For the controlled Basic reproduction

292

L. Li et al. / Infectious Disease Modelling 5 (2020) 282e292

number, the range of valuation was selected in the range of [0, 1.5]. At the same time, due to the incubation period of NHCC is
given in 3e7 days, so we put the estimates of the incubation period interval in the 3e9 days. The average time for contagion of
individuals is also an important parameter. In this paper, according to the data of NHCC, we know that it takes 5 days from the
onset to the diagnosis of isolation, and the ﬁrst three days of the onset are infectious (Xia et al., 2020), so the average time for
contagion in this paper is 3 þ 5 ¼ 8.

The Monte Carlo method was used in the building stage of the model, and we used the programming language-Cþþ for
modeling. In this model, a single individual may be in the following four states, latency, illness, health, or death. According to
the different control stages of the speciﬁc regions, (such as Hubei regions, non-Hubei regions in China, Italy, et al.). We set up
different Gaussian distributions for propagation simulation. By selecting the optimal estimated parameters to ﬁt the ofﬁcial
curve, we use the Particle Swarm optimization algorithm to optimal the model. Then, we predict the future development
trend based on the obtained parameter values. The infection time of the initial case was reversed by the model. The simu-
lation results are shown in Figs. 1e10.

References

Corman, V. M., Landt, O., Kaiser, M., et al. (2020). Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR. Euro Surveillance, 25(3).
Heymann, D. L. (2020-02-15). Data sharing and outbreaks: Best practice exempliﬁed. The Lancet, 469e470.
Hui, D. S., Azhar, E. I., Madani, T. A., et al. (2020). The continuing 2019-nCoV epidemic threat of novel coronaviruses to global healthdthe latest 2019 novel

coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 91, 264e266.

Mizumoto, K., & Chowell, G. (2020). Transmission potential of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) onboard the diamond Princess Cruises Ship. Infectious

Disease Modelling, 5, 264e270.

2020. Euro Surveillance, 25(4).

Medicine.

Read, J. M., et al. (2020). Novel coronavirus 2019-nCoV: Early estimation of epidemiological parameters and epidemic predictions. medRxiv.
Riou, J., & Althaus, C. L. (2020). Pattern of early human-to-human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV), December 2019 to January

Rothe, C., Schunk, M., Sothmann, P., et al. (2020). Transmission of 2019-nCoV infection from an asymptomatic contact in Germany. New England Journal of

Shao, Y., & Wu, J. (2020). IDM editorial statement on the 2019-nCoV. Infectious Disease ModellingVol, 5, 233e234.
Xia, W., Liao, J., Li, C., et al. (2020). Transmission of corona virus disease 2019 during the incubation period may lead to a quarantine loophole. medRxiv.
Yang, Y., & Niu, X. (2018). The general theory of information security. Electronic Industry Press, 1.
Yang, Y., & Niu, X. (2019). Hacker cybernetics. Electronic Industry Press, 10.
http://wjw.hubei.gov.cn/fbjd/tzgg/.
http://www.labour-daily.cn/shsldb/tj/content/009346ddfd45c001e8226c92bf95ed90.html.
http://www.stdaily.com/zhuanti/zfhzlt5fr/2020-02/13/content_878194.shtml.
https://tech.sina.com.cn/roll/2020-03-10/doc-iimxyqvz9368014.shtml.
https://www.best73.com/news/14035.html.
https://www.huxiu.com/article/344256.html.

