Review

What Does Plant-Based Vaccine Technology Oﬀer to
the Fight against COVID-19?

Sergio Rosales-Mendoza 1,2,*, Verónica A. Márquez-Escobar 1,2, Omar González-Ortega 1
Ricardo Nieto-Gómez 1,2 and Jaime I. Arévalo-Villalobos 1,2
1

Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí, Av. Dr. Manuel Nava 6,
San Luis Potosí 78210, Mexico; vero_marquez_333@hotmail.com (V.A.M.-E.);
omar.gonzalez@uaslp.mx (O.G.-O.); ricardoxvi@hotmail.com (R.N.-G.);
aviivan_jaime@hotmail.com (J.I.A.-V.)
Sección de Biotecnología, Centro de Investigación en Ciencias de la Salud y Biomedicina, Universidad
Autónoma de San Luis Potosí, Av. Sierra Leona 550, Lomas 2ª Sección, San Luis Potosí 78210, Mexico

,

2

* Correspondence: rosales.s@uaslp.mx; Tel.: +444-826-2440; Fax: +444-826-2440

Received: 27 March 2020; Accepted: 9 April 2020; Published: 14 April 2020

Abstract: The emergence of new pathogenic viral strains is a constant threat to global health, with
the new coronavirus strain COVID-19 as the latest example. COVID-19, caused by the SARS-CoV-2
virus has quickly spread around the globe. This pandemic demands rapid development of drugs and
vaccines. Plant-based vaccines are a technology with proven viability, which have led to promising
results for candidates evaluated at the clinical level, meaning this technology could contribute towards
the ﬁght against COVID-19. Herein, a perspective in how plant-based vaccines can be developed
against COVID-19 is presented. Injectable vaccines could be generated by using transient expression
systems, which oﬀer the highest protein yields and are already adopted at the industrial level to produce
VLPs-vaccines and other biopharmaceuticals under GMPC-processes. Stably-transformed plants
are another option, but this approach requires more time for the development of antigen-producing
lines. Nonetheless, this approach oﬀers the possibility of developing oral vaccines in which the
plant cell could act as the antigen delivery agent. Therefore, this is the most attractive approach in
terms of cost, easy delivery, and mucosal immunity induction. The development of multiepitope,
rationally-designed vaccines is also discussed regarding the experience gained in expression of
chimeric immunogenic proteins in plant systems.

Keywords: zoonosis; multiepitope vaccine; molecular farming; oral vaccines; epitope-based vaccine;
mucosal immunization

1. Introduction

The coronaviruses (CoVs) are enveloped viruses having a positive-sense, single-stranded genomic
RNA [1] and are grouped into four genera: α-CoVs, β-CoVs, γ-CoVs, and δ-CoVs. The ones that aﬀect
mammals are α- and β-CoVs, while the other two genera infect birds and could also infect mammals [2].
Lately, the coronavirus has become a remarkable concern for global health after the diagnosis of
a cluster of unknown pneumonia patients in December 2019 in Wuhan, China. The outbreak was
associated with workers in the Wuhan Wholesale Seafood Market, in which live exotic animals are
sold [3]. The pathogen was named SARS-CoV-2 given its similarity (70% of genomic similarity) to
SARS-CoV-1, which was responsible for the 2002–2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome epidemic
(SARS). Until now, the oﬃcial and accepted name for this new coronavirus strain is COVID-19 virus,
an acronym for coronavirus infectious disease 2019 [1]. A systematic genomic analysis has revealed
380 amino acid substitutions between SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, which is a starting point to study
its functional and pathogenic divergence [4].

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183; doi:10.3390/vaccines8020183

www.mdpi.com/journal/vaccines

(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:7)Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

2 of 19

Since the end of 2019, COVID-19 has disseminated over the world. Every continent has reported
presence of the virus and the World Health Organization has declared a Public Health Emergency of
International Concern on 30 January, 2020 [1]. On 11 March, 2020, pandemic status was announced.
This is the ﬁrst pandemic caused by a coronavirus species. The symptoms associated with COVID-19
comprise ﬂu-like symptoms including fever, cough, dyspnea, myalgia, and asthenia. SARS-CoV-2
can cause pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, sepsis, and septic shock that can lead to
death [5]. COVID-19 patients usually exhibit fever and lower respiratory tract symptoms and the
estimated incubation time for the disease is 14 days. The most accepted COVID-19 diagnosis method is
real-time PCR to detect its genomic RNA, which was implemented thanks to the rapid sequencing and
availability of the genomic sequence. The processing of respiratory or blood samples allows detection
in a few hours [2]. At the end of March, the global number of conﬁrmed cases of COVID-19 was
around 441,000 which has led to approximately 20,000 deaths in 172 countries/regions [6]. China has
the majority of the cases with more than 81,000 cases recorded, followed by Italy with more than 69,000
recorded cases [1].

Health control measures mainly include drugs to relieve symptoms and maintain vital functions.
The most frequent form of human–human transmission is by spread through aerial drops that are
discharged upon sneezing, coughing, or exhaling [7]. Additionally, transmission by contact is also
prominent especially through the oral, nasal, and ocular mucous membranes [8]. Therefore, the main
immediate measures to prevent transmission include hand washing, wearing masks, and following
good hygiene practices when coughing and sneezing [9].

2. Development of Therapeutic and Prophylactic Treatments against COVID-19

Presently, there is no speciﬁc treatment for COVID-19. As an emerging pathogen, several
knowledge gaps exist about the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the coming months will be critical to reﬁne clinical
management and advancement in the validation of possible treatments. A myriad of eﬀorts is ongoing
to perform clinical trials and determine the eﬃcacy of preexisting drugs, with hydroxychloroquine and
Remdesivir as the most promising candidates [10]. Receptor blockers are also under evaluation [11],
along with the assessment and development of monoclonal antibodies. Moreover, transfusions using
plasma from individuals recovered from SARS-CoV-2 infection (containing neutralizing antibodies)
are under exploration with promising ﬁndings [12]. Nonetheless, vaccination is the most eﬀective
approach to control and ultimately eradicate infectious diseases. Since SARS-CoV-2 possesses high
transmissibility (asymptomatic and presymptomatic virus shedding, which results in a high number
of patients with mild symptoms), the development of vaccines is an urgent goal to ﬁght against this
pathogen. The straightforward path to generate vaccine candidates is the technology of inactivated
vaccines, which can be formulated with SARS-CoV-2 virions previously inactivated by chemical or
physical treatments. A vaccine based on live-attenuated virus is another possible approach [13].
For SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, inactivated vaccine candidates have induced robust humoral
responses leading to virus neutralization. Alternatively, the construction of a chimeric attenuated
virus constitutes an interesting path. For instance, the inﬂuenza virus can be used as a scaﬀold to
expose SARS-CoV-2 antigens and generate a bivalent vaccine targeting two relevant pathogens causing
respiratory diseases [14]. Similarly, adenoviral vectors could be applied in this ﬁeld [15]. Vaccines
based on whole viruses are associated with concerns about antibody-dependent enhancement of viral
infection, reactogenicity, and strain reversion to pathogenic forms, among other safety issues [16].
Therefore, the path for vaccine development will require a detailed characterization, not only in terms
of eﬃcacy but also safety [17].

Although inactivated vaccines will perhaps be the main avenue for generating the ﬁrst experimental
vaccines, alternative approaches should be explored in parallel, namely the development of subunit
vaccines. Since the coronavirus spike (S) glycoproteins initiate entry into cells; they are considered
the primary target for neutralizing antibodies (Figure 1). Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses
are also of key relevance to protect against viral infections [18]. Under these principles, vaccine

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

3 of 19

development against COVID-19 has been initiated and eﬀorts announced in this ﬁeld include the
development of RNA-based vaccines by CureVac [19,20], and an RNA vaccine candidate formulated
with a novel lipid nanoparticle (LNP) carrying mRNA encoding for a full-length, prefusion stabilized
S protein [21]. Another candidate (developed by Shenzhen Geno-Immune Medical Institute [22])
consists of a multiepitopic vaccine based on the generation of artiﬁcial antigen presenting cells through
transduction as a way to express viral antigens and immune modulatory genes to ultimately activate
T cells.

Figure 1. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The virus is formed by an envelope membrane associated
with the following structural proteins: spike protein (S), which mediates binding to the host cell
receptors and considered a critical target for the induction of antibodies capable of neutralizing
the virus; hemagglutinin-esterase dimer (HE), which acts as a potent mediator of attachment and
destruction of sialic acid receptors on the host cell surface; a membrane glycoprotein (M), which is
important to generate the virus; and the envelope protein (E), which adheres to the M protein to form
the viral envelope. The viral structure also comprises a nucleocapsid protein (N) that, along with the
RNA genome, produces the nucleocapsid.

Although the conventional developmental paths for vaccines take several years, the vaccine
against hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) that was approved in China; demonstrates how
joint eﬀorts can lead to new vaccines that are accepted in relatively short periods after a pathogen
emerges [23].

Similarities with the SARS-CoV-1 virus constitute a valuable reference for vaccine development,
however it should be considered that the genetic variability of SARS-CoV-1 seems higher as more
than two variants have been described. Despite this, the cross protection of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS
experimental vaccines remains to be explored. Thus far, there is evidence that some SARS-CoV-1
neutralizing antibodies cross react with SARS-CoV-2, however extensive research in this regard is
needed. The epitopes conserved among SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 have been identiﬁed and
proposed for vaccine development [24].

The race for generating fundamental knowledge on COVID-19 is leading to rapid advances, which
will be useful to reﬁne vaccine design. For instance, Walls et al. [25], reported cryo-EM structures of the
ectodomain trimer, which will be of critical importance for designing vaccines and viral entry blockers.

Vaccines 2020, 8, x 3 of 20  these principles, vaccine development against COVID-19 has been initiated and efforts announced in this field include the development of RNA-based vaccines by CureVac [19,20], and an RNA vaccine candidate formulated with a novel lipid nanoparticle (LNP) carrying mRNA encoding for a full-length, prefusion stabilized S protein [21]. Another candidate (developed by Shenzhen Geno-Immune Medical Institute [22]) consists of a multiepitopic vaccine based on the generation of artificial antigen presenting cells through transduction as a way to express viral antigens and immune modulatory genes to ultimately activate T cells.   Figure 1. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The virus is formed by an envelope membrane associated with the following structural proteins: spike protein (S), which mediates binding to the host cell receptors and considered a critical target for the induction of antibodies capable of neutralizing the virus; hemagglutinin-esterase dimer (HE), which acts as a potent mediator of attachment and destruction of sialic acid receptors on the host cell surface; a membrane glycoprotein (M), which is important to generate the virus; and the envelope protein (E), which adheres to the M protein to form the viral envelope. The viral structure also comprises a nucleocapsid protein (N) that, along with the RNA genome, produces the nucleocapsid. Although the conventional developmental paths for vaccines take several years, the vaccine against hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) that was approved in China; demonstrates how joint efforts can lead to new vaccines that are accepted in relatively short periods after a pathogen emerges [23].  Similarities with the SARS-CoV-1 virus constitute a valuable reference for vaccine development, however it should be considered that the genetic variability of SARS-CoV-1 seems higher as more than two variants have been described. Despite this, the cross protection of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS experimental vaccines remains to be explored. Thus far, there is evidence that some SARS-CoV-1 neutralizing antibodies cross react with SARS-CoV-2, however extensive research in this regard is needed. The epitopes conserved among SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 have been identified and proposed for vaccine development [24].  The race for generating fundamental knowledge on COVID-19 is leading to rapid advances, which will be useful to refine vaccine design. For instance, Walls et al. [25], reported cryo-EM structures of the ectodomain trimer, which will be of critical importance for designing vaccines and viral entry blockers. They also found evidence of potent inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 entry into host cells by using murine polyclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV-1, which suggests that conserved S Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

4 of 19

They also found evidence of potent inhibition of SARS-CoV-2 entry into host cells by using murine
polyclonal antibodies against SARS-CoV-1, which suggests that conserved S epitopes among these
viruses are relevant for immunization and perhaps preexisting immunization models will be useful
in the ﬁght against COVID-19. The characterization of other key targets for drug design has been
accelerated (e.g., the protease X-ray structure has been recently described [26]). Therefore, these recent
advances will set the basis to accelerate the development of COVID-19 subunit vaccines taking into
consideration the SARS-CoV-1 vaccine development, especially the approach targeting the S protein.
In parallel with these advances in vaccine design, deﬁning vaccine platforms amenable for
rapid and large scale production is required. These must keep in mind that low cost, safe, and easy
distribution and delivery are the required attributes to implement broad coverage of vaccination
campaigns; especially in the developing countries.

3. Molecular Farming and the Plant-based Vaccines Technology

Genetically engineered plants constitute a consolidated platform for the manufacturing of
biopharmaceuticals. Plants have been used over the last three decades for this purpose. Thus far,
a diverse group of biopharmaceuticals has been functionally produced in plant systems that include
antibodies, vaccines, growth factors, and cytokines [27]. Remarkably, a recombinant enzyme produced
in carrot cells has been already approved by the FDA for Gaucher’s disease treatment [28]. The main
advantages of plant-based platforms include the inability to replicate human pathogens (diminishing
the risk of contamination and making the puriﬁcation process less strident), use of unsophisticated
bioreactors, and eﬃcient synthesis of complex proteins (multimeric or glycosylated) [29,30].

3.1. Approaches for Recombinant Protein Expression in Plants

The current expression approaches for recombinant proteins using the plant cell as host
comprise stably-transformed plants at the nuclear or chloroplast levels and transiently-transformed
plants. These expression modalities are summarized in Table 1. The conventional approach for
expression of transgenes in plants comprises transgene insertion into the nuclear genome. Currently,
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is the most popular method to achieve this modiﬁcation since
this bacterium has the ability to transfer large segments of DNA with minimal rearrangement at
high eﬃciency with low number of insertions. Nonetheless, the transgene is randomly inserted
into the genome, which often leads to positional eﬀects that make expression levels unpredictable
and interruption of endogenous genes a possibility. Another limitation is the induction of silencing
mechanisms that hamper productivity. Nevertheless, it should be considered that new technologies are
emerging to cope with these limitations by providing ways to achieve site-directed insertion through
a number of mechanisms [31].

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

5 of 19

Table 1. Description of the expression approaches for the production of plant-based vaccines and precedents for MERS/SARS-CoV-1 vaccines.

Approach

Attractive Features

Drawbacks

MERS/SARS Precedents

Reference

Proposed Target
Antigens

Stable nuclear
genome
transformation

Inheritable antigen production,
allows seed bank generation;
post-translational modiﬁcations
are performed;
protocols available for several
species including seed crops

Non-site speciﬁc
transgene insertion;
horizontal gene transfer is possible;
transgene expression aﬀected by
position eﬀects and silencing;
transformation takes long time

S protein;
multiepitope
vaccines

The N-terminal fragment of the SARS-CoV-1 S
protein (S1) was expressed in stably transformed
tomato and low-nicotine tobacco plants, which
induced IgA and IgG responses in mice.

[32]

Transient nuclear
genome
transformation

Rapid production;
high productivity;
implemented at the industrial level

Seed bank cannot be generated;
requires puriﬁcation of the antigen
to eliminate toxic compounds from
the host and ag-robacteria residues

S protein;
multiepitope
vaccines

A chimeric protein of GFP and amino acids 1-658
of the SARS-CoV-1 S protein (S1:GFP) was
transiently expressed in tobacco leaves and stably
transformed in tobacco and lettuce.
No immunization assays were performed
The SARS-CoV-1 N protein was transiently
expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana, which induced
in mice high levels of IgG1 and IgG2a and up
regulation of IFN-γ and IL-10 in splenocytes.
A chimeric protein of GFP and the SARS-CoV-1 S
protein was transiently expressed in tobacco
plants. No immunization tests were performed.
The SARS-CoV-1 M and N proteins were
transiently expressed in N. benthamiana. The N
protein was antigenic but immunogenicity was
not assessed.

[33–35]

Transplastomic
technologies

High productivity;
multigene expression is possible;
improved biosafety since the
transgene is inherited maternally;
site-speciﬁc insertion through
recombination;
not aﬀected by silencing or
position eﬀects

Complex post-translational
modiﬁcations are not performed;
transformation protocols available
for few species and the generation
of lines takes long time.

Multiepitope
vaccines

A chimeric protein of GFP and amino acids 1-658
of the SARS-CoV-1 S (S1:GFP) was expressed in
transplastomic tobacco plants.

[32,36]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

6 of 19

In the case of transplastomic technologies, they typically comprise the site-directed insertion of
the foreign DNA into the chloroplast genome in an event induced by homologous recombination.
The main advantage of this technology is the high protein yield, which is a consequence of the high
copy number of the transgene and the fact that silencing events have not been reported thus far,
and position eﬀects are avoided due to the site-directed insertion. In addition, transgene conﬁnement
is achieved given the maternal inheritance shown by most plant species and several proteins can be
produced from a single transformation event through the use of operon-like arrangements [37,38].
For more information regarding transplastomic technologies, readers are referred to reviews published
by [36,39].

Another approach to express heterologous protein in plants relies on the use of viral-based
vectors, which exploit the eﬃcient promoters, UTRs, and DNA/RNA replication mechanisms found in
plant viruses. Interestingly, the Agrobacterium-mediated delivery of viral vectors has consolidated as
a highly eﬃcient strategy to achieve rapid production of biopharmaceuticals with yield up to 5 g of
protein per kg of fresh plant biomass. The tobamoviruses, potexviruses, tobraviruses, geminiviruses,
and comoviruses have served as a basis for the development of transient, eﬃcient expression systems
in plants [40]. This technology, however, demands the puriﬁcation of the target protein given the
presence of toxic compounds (e.g., alkaloids) in the typical host (Nicotiana benthamiana), as well as
bacterial residues, especially endotoxins. Therefore, at present, this technology is applied for the
formulation of injectable or nasal vaccines.

3.2. Current Scenario of Plant-Based Vaccines

Thus far, some plant-vaccine candidates have entered clinical trials, including candidates against
swine inﬂuenza, rabies, and hepatitis B [41]. The most promising candidates are the inﬂuenza vaccines
developed by Medicago Inc. that rely on using a non-replicative vector carrying viral regulatory
sequences to mediate the transient expression of Hemagglutinin (HA) in N. benthamiana, which has
led to injectable vaccine candidates [42,43]. Overall, these vaccines have been seen as safe and their
immunogenic properties have been positively evaluated using in vitro assays with human and mice
cells. The trials conducted in volunteers revealed proper immunogenicity with no serious adverse
eﬀects (see Table 2). Moreover, a group of respiratory diseases has been targeted through the plant-based
production of antigens with promising immunogenicity in preclinical trials [44].

Table 2. Vaccines against inﬂuenza based on plant-made Virus-Like Particles (VLPs), evaluated in vitro
or in mice and humans.

VLPs Produced and Immunization Approach

Findings

Reference

Haemagglutinin (HA) from H1N1
A/California/07/2009 (pdmH1N1). Mice were
immunized twice by the intramuscular (i.m.)
route or by combining i.m. priming and
(intranasal) i.n. boosting.

HA from strains A/California/07/2009 H1N1
(H1/Cal), A/Victoria/361/11 H3N2 (H3/Vic),
B/Brisbane/60/08 (B/Bris, Victoria lineage),
and B/Massachusetts/02/2012 (B/Mass, Yamagata
lineage). In a Phase II clinical trial, subjects were
immunized with a single i.m. dose using
Alhydrogel as an adjuvant.

VLP inﬂuenza vaccination exhibited high
levels of antibodies titers compared to the
inactivated inﬂuenza vaccine (IIV).
Lung homogenate displayed
chemokine/cytokine levels and virus
loads lower in the VLP groups compared
to the IIV group.

Both homologous and heterologous
antigen-speciﬁc CD4+ T cells were
elicited. Additionally, production of
IFN-γ, IL-2, and/or TNF-α was achieved
upon ex vivo antigenic re-stimulation.

[45]

[46]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

7 of 19

VLPs Produced and Immunization Approach

Findings

Reference

Table 2. Cont.

HA from A/California/07/2009 H1N1. VLPs were
evaluated in vitro using human
monocyte-derived macrophages.

HA from A/H1N1/California/07/09 (pdmH1N1).
The inactivated H1N1 vaccine (IIV) was included
as a reference vaccine. Mice were
i.m.-immunized twice.

HA from A/California/7/09 (H1N1) and
A/Indonesia/5/05 (H5N1). In vitro assays were
performed using mouse and human DCs. Mice
were immunized by the i.m. route using
Alhydrogel as an adjuvant.

HA from A/California/7/2009 or A/Indonesia/5/05
strains. In vitro assays were performed using
mouse dendritic cells.

The plant-made VLPs were eﬃciently
captured and subjected to endosomal
processing and cross-presentation.
CD4+ (TNF-α, IFN-γ) and CD8+ (IFN-γ)
T cell responses were higher for the
plant-made vaccine than the IIV
formulation. The plant-made VLP vaccine
elicited stronger and more balanced
immune responses than IIV.

Human DCs exposed to plant-made VLPs
showed high stimulation in terms of
secretion of IL-6, IL-10, and TNFα and
CD83 expression, along with activation of
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
VLPs induced accumulation of both
cDC1s and cDC2 in the draining lymph
nodes of test mice.
Lymphocytes from mice immunized with
plant-made VLPs secreted higher
concentrations of pro-inﬂammatory
cytokines (including IL-12, IL-6,
and TNF-α) upon antigenic stimulation.

The plant-made VLPs trimmers were
morphologically stable over time and
interacted with activated
antigen-presenting cells similar to the
wild type virus.

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

Nonetheless, the ultimate goal for low-cost vaccine development could be achieved by generating
oral formulations not requiring puriﬁcation and being composed of freeze-dried biomass encapsulated
in gelatin pills or tablets. Under this focus, the goal is to trigger speciﬁc immune responses via the
gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALT). For this purpose, edible plants lacking toxic metabolites
should be used. Perhaps the main disadvantage of this technology is the long time required to
generate transformed lines of edible crops eﬃciently expressing the antigen of interest (e.g., rice or corn
transgenic lines or transplastomic lines) [51]. These oral vaccines will overcome the disadvantages
of injectable vaccines such as painful administration and the risk associated with invasive delivery
routes. In terms of costs, avoiding the requirements of sterile devices and trained personnel represent
substantial savings. The fact that plant-based vaccine formulations will not require antigen puriﬁcation
will be, without a doubt, the main factor that will make them low-cost alternatives [52], which is
necessary to provide wide vaccination coverage in developing and low-income countries. Recent
promising reports in the viability of formulating oral vaccines include the case of the Hepatitis B virus
surface antigen [53] and models of immunotherapy against allergy with promising results [54], among
other diseases.

Therefore plant-based vaccines are becoming a reality, although it should be recognized that the
progress has been slower than initially expected. This is particularly true for the development of oral
vaccines, with the main drawbacks being poor characterization of antigen stability, bioavailability,
and reproducibility [51,55].

The currently available expression strategies for foreign proteins in plants allow projecting the
generation of several vaccine candidates against COVID-19 in the short term. The expression approach

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

8 of 19

and targeted organelle will depend on the nature of the selected target antigen. In the following section,
possible avenues for the development of plant-based vaccines are envisaged (Table 3 and Figure 2).

Figure 2. Developmental paths for plant-based vaccines. Vaccine antigens can comprise full length
viral proteins or chimeric proteins rationally designed to serve as multiepitopic vaccines. This is
based on the selection of T cell and B cell epitopes with the aid of immune bioinformatics tools
and experimental data of their protective capacity. Current genetic engineering technologies allow
expressing target antigens either stably or transiently, which allow exploring distinct immunization
approaches. Transient expression typically requires puriﬁcation of the antigen—which is useful for
the formulation of injectable vaccines—whereas stable transformation, especially in edible crops,
allows implementing oral immunization schemes without puriﬁcation. Combined schemes, using pure
antigens for priming by parenteral administration and plant biomass containing the antigen for oral
boosting, are likely ideal approaches capable of inducing long-term protection in several compartments,
especially in mucous membranes.

Table 3. Summary of antigen design strategies rendering highly immunogenic formulations.

Approach

Attractive Features

Drawbacks

References

Epitopes fused to B
subunits of cholera toxin
or the heat labile
enterotoxin (CTB/LTB)

Compatible with
mucosal immunization

May induce tolerance

[56,57]

VLPs (native or chimeric)

Simple puriﬁcation

Immune complexes

Simple puriﬁcation

ELPylated antigens

Robust expression
Simple puriﬁcation

Chimeric VLPs often
have limitations on
the insert size
(unrelated antigen)

High expression is
required to form the
complexes

Low yields when
large number of ELP
moieties are included

[58]

[59]

[60]

4. Possibilities to Develop Anti-COVID-19 Plant-based Vaccines

4.1. Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)

One prominent approach for vaccine design is based on the use of virus-like particles (VLPs),
which are macromolecular complexes resembling viruses, but lacking their genome. In this way,
VLPs mimic the native structure of viruses, but are not infective. This avoids the disadvantages of

Vaccines 2020, 8, x 3 of 20  The currently available expression strategies for foreign proteins in plants allow projecting the generation of several vaccine candidates against COVID-19 in the short term. The expression approach and targeted organelle will depend on the nature of the selected target antigen. In the following section, possible avenues for the development of plant-based vaccines are envisaged (Table 3 and Figure 2).  Figure 2. Developmental paths for plant-based vaccines. Vaccine antigens can comprise full length viral proteins or chimeric proteins rationally designed to serve as multiepitopic vaccines. This is based on the selection of T cell and B cell epitopes with the aid of immune bioinformatics tools and experimental data of their protective capacity. Current genetic engineering technologies allow expressing target antigens either stably or transiently, which allow exploring distinct immunization approaches. Transient expression typically requires purification of the antigen—which is useful for the formulation of injectable vaccines—whereas stable transformation, especially in edible crops, allows implementing oral immunization schemes without purification. Combined schemes, using pure antigens for priming by parenteral administration and plant biomass containing the antigen for oral boosting, are likely ideal approaches capable of inducing long-term protection in several compartments, especially in mucous membranes. Table 3. Summary of antigen design strategies rendering highly immunogenic formulations. Approach Attractive Features Drawbacks References Epitopes fused to B subunits of cholera toxin or the heat labile enterotoxin (CTB/LTB)  Compatible with mucosal immunization  May induce tolerance [56,57] VLPs (native or chimeric) Simple purification  Chimeric VLPs often have limitations on the insert size (unrelated antigen) [58] Immune complexes Simple purification High expression is required to form the complexes [59] ELPylated antigens  Robust expression  Simple purification Low yields when large number of ELP moieties are included  [60] Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

9 of 19

vaccines formulated with attenuated or inactivated viruses that include reactogenicity and reversion to
pathogenic forms [61,62]. A myriad of reports on the production of VLPs can be found in the literature
that comprise the cases of the inﬂuenza virus, human papillomavirus, human immunodeﬁciency virus,
foot and mouth disease virus, Norwalk virus, rift valley fever virus, and hepatitis B virus [61–64].

The precedents of SARS-CoV-1 and MERS antigens expressed in recombinant systems leading to
the formation of VLPs constitute important guides for the topic of COVID-19 vaccine development.
Mortola and Roy (2004) produced coronavirus VLPs applying baculovirus/insect cells expression (Sf9
cells), which was based on the following structural proteins: S (spike), E (envelope), M (membrane),
and N (nucleocapsid) of SARS-CoV, either individually or simultaneously. Simultaneous expression at
high levels was achieved for S, E, and M proteins, leading to an eﬃcient VLPs assembly and release,
evidenced by electron microscopy and immunoﬂuorescence. The authors demonstrated that the
formed VLPs were similar in morphology to the SARS-CoV-1 virions [65]. Another group reported
in the same year that M and E proteins were suﬃcient for the eﬃcient formation of VLPs in insect
cells [66].

In 2007, the immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-1 VLPs was ﬁrst described by evaluating insect
cell-made VLPs based on the M, E, and S proteins. Electron microscopy demonstrated VLPs formation
in co-infected insect cells. Mice subjected to an immunization scheme consisting of four subcutaneous
(s.c.) doses of VLPs emulsiﬁed with Freund’s adjuvant showed high antibody titers against SARS CoV.
Furthermore, VLPs elicited cellular immunity following increased production of IFN-γ and IL-4 [67].
Subsequent in vitro assays using VLPs designed with the bat-isolated coronavirus protein S and the
SARS-CoV-1 proteins E and M; demonstrated ability to stimulate DCs in terms of cytokine induction,
evidenced by IL-6 and TNF-alpha production. Furthermore, the study indicated that IFN-γ+ and IL-4+
CD4+ T cells increased in co-culture with DCs pre-exposed to the VLPs tested [68].

Given that immunization by mucosal routes is the most pertinent for vaccination, SARS-CoV-1
VLPs were analyzed in a mouse model based on intraperitoneal or nasal immunization. Both routes
led to SARS-CoV-1-speciﬁc IgG responses, IgG levels in the groups immunized intraperitoneally
were higher. Nasal immunization usually results in the induction of secretory IgA responses at
the genital tract, saliva, and lungs; a type of response that is not eﬃciently induced by systemic
In the mentioned study, IgA production at the intestinal tract was higher for
administration.
intraperitoneal administration when compared to intranasal administration, however only genital tract
secretions from the i.n.-immunized group showed neutralization activity [69].

Another approach for the production of VLPs consisted in co-expressing the SARS-CoV-1 S protein
and the M1 inﬂuenza protein in the baculovirus/insect cell expression system. Interestingly, the chimeric
VLPs showed similar size and morphology compared to the wild type SARS-CoV-1. Immunogenicity
and protective eﬃcacy of these chimeric VLPs were tested in a mouse lethal challenge model. Complete
protection from death was observed in mice vaccinated intramuscularly or intranasally with the
chimeric VLPs, which contained 0.8 µg of the SARS-CoV-1 protein S [70].

In the case of the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), VLPs with proteins S, E, and M
were generated using the baculovirus/insect cell expression system by Wang et al.
(2017) [71].
Electron microscopy and immunoelectron microscopy revealed high structural similarity between
the MERS-CoV VLPs and the native virus. Rhesus macaques inoculated with MERS-CoV VLPs and
aluminum adjuvant showed ﬁnal virus neutralizing antibody titers reaching 1:1280; inducing T-helper
1 (Th1) cell-mediated immunity.

In a more recent study, the structural proteins of MERS-CoV were expressed in silkworm larvae
and Bm5 cells for the development of vaccine candidates. However, protein S was not detected in the
form of VLPs despite the fact that E and M proteins were secreted to the culture supernatant. Surfactant
treatment and mechanical extrusion using protein S or Bm5 cells expressing structural proteins allowed
producing nanovesicles exhibiting protein S with a diameter ranging from 100 to 200 nm as revealed
by immuno-TEM [72].

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

10 of 19

Although insect cells possess a protein processing capacity similar to that of higher eukaryotic
cells, the protein processing pathways are not totally equivalent [73]. In terms of N-acetylglycosylation,
insect cells have the ability to assemble N-glycans to a nascent polypeptide. However, they have
unusual ﬁnal processing activity mediated by β-N-acetylglucosaminidase (soluble or membrane-bound
form), which trims an intermediate product common to mammalian and insect pathways resulting in
the insect-speciﬁc paucimannose as a ﬁnal product that avoids the galactosylation process occurring in
mammals [74].

Considering that VLPs of enveloped viruses have been successfully expressed in plants by
expressing the HA protein, it is anticipated that SARS-CoV-2 VLPs could be assembled by expressing
the S protein.
In fact, although not published in the literature yet, Medicago has described the
generation of VLPs in plants [75]. For this purpose, nuclear expression targeting the trans-Golgi
secretion route is proposed to yield a protein subjected to the glycosylation and secretion machinery
that could make possible the production of VLPs [76]. Therefore, adoption of these works would be
valuable during the development of COVID-19 plant-based vaccines (see the section below).

Besides VLPs resembling the SARS-CoV-2 virus, another possible approach is to adopt SARS-CoV-2
epitopes and express them in chimeric VLPs. In this way, a VLP from an unrelated virus can serve as
the scaﬀold to present the target SARS-CoV-2 epitopes. For this purpose, the hepatitis B core protein
has been applied as scaﬀold to display unrelated antigens of some pathogens. In particular, this has
been applied at the immunodominant c/e1 loop region, which allows displaying the target on the spike
structures of the VLPs [77]. A recent review revealed that at least 97 vaccine candidates have been
developed based on plant viruses covering infectious agents, cancer, and autoimmune disorders [78].
The glycosylation patterns of proteins that form VLPs can impact their immunogenicity and
protective capacity. Interestingly, glycoengineering strategies have been successfully implemented for
plants, which allows diversifying their application as hosts for the production of biopharmaceuticals.
This is a relevant aspect considering that plants lack the ability to perform glycosylation, which
is a characteristic of mammalian systems. For instance, plants perform beta1,2-xylosylation, core
alpha1,3-fucosylation, and the addition of a second N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) to the mannose core.
Moreover, plant glycans lack β (1,4’)-galactose and sialic acid, as well as bi-antennary N-glycans [79].
In some cases, such as antibody production, these diﬀerences on glycosylation can be associated to
adverse eﬀects that include generation of immunogenic activity, which can eventually lead to blocking
antibodies against the therapeutic antibody. Nonetheless, in the case of vaccines these diﬀerences
could add more immunogenic potential and improve vaccine eﬃcacy [80].
In any case, it is of
interest to comment that glycoengineering has allowed developing knock down N. benthamiana plants
for beta1,2-xylosyltransferase (XylT) and alpha1,3-fucosyltransferase (FucT) genes, which showed
signiﬁcant reduction in the production of xylosylated and/or core alpha1,3-fucosylated proteins with
no phenotypic alterations [81]. These lines will be valuable tools to study the impact of glycosylation
in the eﬃcacy of COVID-19 VLPs, which will allow optimizing the plant-based vaccines.

4.2. Multiepitopic Vaccines

Another approach that deserves attention is the development of multiepitopic vaccines, which
oﬀers the opportunity of achieving a ﬁne rational vaccine design by selecting epitopes that potentially
induce robust and protective immune responses. At the same time, this approach will discard those
related to non-protective responses or even those inducing antibody-dependent enhancement of the
disease. In this way, a highly eﬃcacious and safe vaccine can be obtained. Of special interest are
the reports proving that speciﬁc S protein epitopes enhance the disease upon a pathogen challenge,
which highlights the relevance of recurring to the rational design of vaccines to ensure not only
immunoprotection, but safety [82].

For the case of multiepitope vaccines against infectious agents, several reports have focused
on selecting the most promising Th, B cell, and T cell epitopes that might allow the rational design
of a vaccine inducing robust protective responses, while at the same time avoiding deleterious or

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

11 of 19

non-relevant responses. One key factor that adds importance to the development of multiepitopic
vaccines against viral disease is genetic variability. In fact, it has been suggested that the SARS-CoV-2
virus evolved into two major types, L and S. The L type (∼70%) predominates versus the S type (∼30%),
with the latter being proposed as the ancestral version. The L type is more aggressive than the S
type and the analysis performed by Tang et al. [83] suggests that human interference inﬂuenced the
prevalence of L and S types right after the outbreak appearance. Another study has also suggested
a rapid evolution of this coronavirus [84]. Therefore, the design of multiepitopic vaccines must adopt
the selection of epitopes conserved among the viral variants with the capacity to induce neutralizing
humoral responses as critical criterion. It should also be considered that CTL responses are relevant to
cope with COVID-19 [85].

The selected epitopes are the targets to which adaptive immune responses should be induced,
but they lack the required complexity to trigger robust immune responses. Therefore, a carrier is
required to increase antigen complexity and, through adjuvant eﬀects, enhance potency of the induced
immune response, making it properly polarized. Among these carriers, the B subunit of the cholera
toxin and the heat-labile enterotoxin from Escherichia coli have been extensively used to carry unrelated
antigens. The main advantage of these molecules is their adjuvant eﬀects at the mucosal levels, as
well as their ability to eﬃciently deliver the antigens to the submucosa thanks to a mechanism of
translocation mediated by binding to the GM1 receptor at the epithelial cells in the mucosal surfaces [86].
Once at the submucosa, the antigen is eﬃciently captured and processed by antigen presenting cells,
which subsequently induce robust mucosal and systemic Th1 immune responses at the lymph nodes.
The design of LTB/CTB-based chimeras carrying SARS-CoV-2 epitopes is an interesting approach that
should be explored. Proline-containing linkers have been used to properly display unrelated antigens
without altering the ability of those carriers to form the pentameric structure responsible for GM1
binding [57]. The accumulation of those chimeric proteins in the ER is advisable, although toxicity has
been reported for some plants accumulating high levels of those recombinant proteins [87].

Given that plant systems have been successfully adopted for the production of multiepitope
proteins, the generation of such vaccines against COVID-19 is considered highly viable [88–90].
Besides expressing chimeric proteins, multiple antigen expression can be achieved by transplastomic
technologies (operon-like expression) or at the nuclear level using the picornaviral 2A sequence that
allows releasing individual antigens from a single coding gene [91].

4.3. Immune Complexes

The production of immune complexes (ICs) in plants is another approach that renders highly
immunogenic agents. ICs consist of antigens complexed to antibodies recognizing them, constituting
macromolecular entities that are eﬃciently captured and processed by antigen presenting cells [92].
This results in the induction of robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses [59,93]. Taking
advantage of the machinery of plant cells for protein synthesis and processing, they have been
exploited as antibodies and ICs factories [94]. For instance, ICs based on the tetanus toxin fragment C
fused to a monoclonal antibody were produced in transgenic tobacco plants. These ICs were highly
immunogenic, inducing immunoprotective eﬀects when administered without accessory adjuvants by
the s.c. (subcutaneous) route in mice [95]. This approach has also been applied to the case of the Ag85B
and Acr antigens from Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the GP1 antigen from the Ebola virus [96,97].
Perhaps the main disadvantage of this approach is the requirement of deﬁned antibodies targeting
the antigen, which is not available yet for SARS-CoV-2. However, it should be considered that the
cross reactivity of anti-SARS-CoV-1 S protein antibodies with the counterpart of SARS-CoV-2 has been
reported [3].

4.4. Elastin-Like Polypeptide Fusions

The puriﬁcation of antigens is a laborious and expensive activity as part of the production of
injectable vaccines [97]. One alternative to simplify puriﬁcation relies on the fusion of elastin-like

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

12 of 19

polypeptides (ELP) that possess a unique property named reversible phase transition, which allows
precipitating the protein of interest by changing the temperature. This approach is an alternative to
the complex/expensive aﬃnity chromatography [98] that has been applied to develop plant-based
vaccines candidates with relevant ﬁndings. For instance, the M. tuberculosis antigens Ag85B and
ESAT-6 were fused to ELP and expressed in transgenic tobacco [99], and the plant-made antigens were
subcutaneously (s.c.)administered to mice and able to trigger long-lasting humoral immune responses.
The ELP did not negatively impact the immunogenic properties of the antigens. The haemagglutinin
(HA) antigen from the inﬂuenza virus has also been expressed under this modality in tobacco, where
antigen puriﬁcation was simpliﬁed and the obtained product induced neutralizing antibodies in mice
after two s.c. immunizations. ELPylation did not alter the immunogenicity of HA [99]. Therefore, these
precedents suggest that the ELP technology is a possible approach to be explored for the production of
antigens against the SARS-CoV-2 virus.

The common steps to the above-mentioned antigen design will comprise determining antigen
yields and antigenic activity, assessing the immunogenic activity in test animals under distinct
administration routes, and validating the safety and stability of the vaccine. The latter will be critical
to justify the application and get approval to conduct clinical trials.

5. Eﬀorts to Develop Plant-Based Vaccines against MERS and SARS-CoV-1

A key precedent for this ﬁeld is the vaccine candidates already reported for SARS-CoV-1 and
MERS, which are both closely related to SARS-CoV-2. Following nuclear expression approaches,
the N-terminal fragment of the SARS-CoV-1 S protein (S1) was expressed in tomato and low-nicotine
tobacco plants using an Agrobacterium-mediated method. Mice orally immunized with this transgenic
tomato revealed signiﬁcantly increased levels of SARS-CoV-1-speciﬁc IgA. Sera of mice parenterally
primed with the transgenic tobacco showed the presence of anti-SARS-CoV-1-IgG [32].

Another study focused on expressing a chimeric protein of GFP and amino acids 1-658 of
the SARS-CoV-1 spike protein (S1:GFP) by using tobacco leaves subjected to transient expression.
After microscopy localization, the fusion protein was observed in the cytosol and the periphery of
the nucleus. Stable transgenic tobacco and lettuce plants were generated by Agrobacterium-mediated
transformation. The expression of the chimeric antigen was also achieved in tobacco chloroplasts.
However, no immunization assays were performed [33,100].

The SARS-CoV-1 nucleocapsid (rN) protein of 423-aa was transiently expressed in N. benthamiana.
Yields reached up to 79 µg/g of leaf fresh weight (corresponding to 0.8%–1% of the Total Soluble
protein, TSP) at 3 dpi under silencing suppression conditions (p19). Mice immunization revealed that
three doses led to eﬀective B-cell maturation and diﬀerentiation, achieving high levels of IgG1 and
IgG2a. IFN-γ and IL-10 were up-regulated in splenocytes, while the expression of IL-2 and IL-4 was
not [33]. The nucleocapsid protein (N) and the membrane protein (M) were transiently expressed
in N. benthamiana. Yields reached up to 3–4 µg/g fresh leaf weight (0.2% TSP) for the N protein,
while the M protein yields were 0.1%–0.15% TSP. The puriﬁed N protein reacted with human sera
having N-speciﬁc antibodies. No immunization assays were performed [35]. These studies constitute
a valuable guide to select the most convenient expression platforms for speciﬁc SARS-CoV-2 antigens.

6. Relevance of Mucosal Vaccines and Prime-Boosting Immunization Schemes

Although most of the vaccines against respiratory diseases are administered by parenteral
routes, it should be recognized that immune proﬁles deserve improvements, especially in terms of
immunogenicity and eﬃcacy in the elderly [101]. Mucosal vaccines, especially intranasal-administered
vaccines, are a promise for immunization against respiratory diseases given the protections induced
in lungs and other mucosal tissues that are critical ports for pathogen entry. Critical alternatives for
the development of mucosal vaccines include guaranteeing antigen delivery and immunostimulating
capacity at the mucosa, while at the same time being minimally reactogenic/toxic. Among the

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

13 of 19

immunopotentiator molecules that can be explored are bacterial toxin derivatives, toll-like receptor
ligands, and cytokines [102,103].

Although some companies have already started the production of plant-based VLPs
vaccines [75,104] using transient expression systems, these eﬀorts are mainly directed to developing
injectable vaccines. Therefore, it is imperative to start developing alternatives related to mucosal
immunization. For this purpose, generating plants stably expressing SARS-CoV-2 antigens will open
new avenues for the exploitation of this technology. This approach will result in the production of
edible plant material containing SARS-CoV-2 antigens that could be used for the development of
oral boosting agents. Interestingly, this concept has been assessed by some groups with relevant
results. In the case of a vaccine targeting the hepatitis B virus, a scheme comprising intramuscular
(i.m.) boosting with the pure HBsAg antigen followed by double oral boosting with plant material
containing HBsAg at six week intervals led to a comparable response to that induced by the standard
intramuscular (i.m.) vaccination scheme [53]. Moreover, in the case of poliomyelitis vaccination,
a plant-based vaccine based on transplastomic plants expressing the VP1 antigen fused to a carrier has
been assessed as oral boosting agents after priming with the inactivated polio vaccine administered
subcutaneously. Boosting with the plant-made VP1-based antigen signiﬁcantly enhanced VP1-IgG1
and VP1-IgA titers when compared to the response in animals not receiving boosts. The scheme also
allowed inducing neutralizing antibodies for the three poliovirus Sabin serotypes when two doses
of IPV and plant-cell oral boosts were administered, whereas a single dose of IPV resulted in low
neutralization potential [105]. In this way, freeze-dried plant material can be used as a low-cost vaccine
rendering thermostability and easy to administer features.

Similarly, pure antigens produced in plants have been assessed with promising results in schemes
where a conventional vaccine is used as a priming agent and the plant-made antigen is administered
by the oral route as boosting [106]. Exploring these schemes will be useful to achieve the best immune
proﬁle against SARS-CoV-2 in terms of safe and long-lasting protective immune responses. In fact,
the potential of using prime-boosting schemes through diﬀerent immunization routes has been proven
as an eﬃcacious approach to achieve the desired immune proﬁles [107].

7. Conclusions

The emergence of COVID-19 has led to a global emergency that demands the development of
new biologics, especially vaccines, to counteract against this threat. In this scenario, a plant-made
vaccine is a viable approach to rapidly respond to this need. The current expression technologies
oﬀer relevant paths for developing anti-COVID-19 vaccines. VLPs constitute an attractive approach
for the development of eﬃcient and safe vaccines, which is associated with high immunogenicity,
preservation of the antigenic determinants, and lack of replicative capacity. Thus, VLPs based on
the main SARS-CoV-2 structural proteins is an attractive approach for vaccine development against
coronavirus infections. The transient expression systems based on deconstructed viral vectors and
N. benthamiana as host will allow for immediate exploitation of plants as eﬃcient biofactories of
injectable vaccine candidates, which are expected to be implemented and entered into clinical trials in
a year. The development of vaccines based on transplastomic lines or edible plant species transformed
at the nuclear level and intended to result in oral vaccines (especially boosting agents to provide
mucosal immunity) are considered long term goals. However, they have special importance given their
low cost and potential to serve as eﬀective boosting agents, which could lead to attractive immune
proﬁles characterized by proper humoral response in the mucosal compartments and long-lasting
protection, especially for the elderly. In parallel to these developments, the production of monoclonal
antibodies in plants will provide another strategy to generate alternatives to the convalescent plasma
transfusion, in which plant-made antibodies will constitute a low cost and safer intravenous treatment
for critically ill patients.

Perhaps the main challenge envisioned for the development of COVID-19 plant-based vaccines
will be, as is typical for all vaccines, testing their eﬃcacy in large clinical trials to validate their

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

14 of 19

safety while fulﬁlling the requirements of regulatory agencies. The fact that there are precedents of
a plant-made biopharmaceutical approved for human use and plant-made vaccines against inﬂuenza
under clinical trials (with promising safety and eﬃcacy) is encouraging. Therefore, plant-based
vaccines have a realistic potential to contribute to the ﬁght against COVID-19.

As the COVID-19 epidemic advances, the exploitation of plant-made vaccines is a promise
to generate low cost, easy to administer, and safe/eﬀective vaccines to ﬁght against this pandemic.
The next few months will be critical to envision the real potential of this technology.

Author Contributions: Writing—original draft preparation, S.R.-M., V.A.M.-E., R.N.-G., and J.I.A.-V.; review and
editing, O.G.-O.; editing of tables and ﬁgures, V.A.M.-E. and S.R.M. All authors have read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.

Funding: This research was funded by UASLP, grant number FAI-2020; and the APC was funded by SEP-Mexico
[PRODEP-2020].

Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.

References

1. WHO (World Health Organization). Available online: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-

2.

3.

coronavirus-2019 (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Chen, Y.; Liu, Q.; Guo, D. Emerging coronaviruses: Genome structure, replication, and pathogenesis. J. Med.
Virol. 2020, 92, 418–423. [CrossRef]
Tian, X.; Li, C.; Huang, A.; Xia, S.; Lu, S.; Shi, Z.; Lu, L.; Jiang, S.; Yang, Z.; Wu, Y.; et al. Potent binding of
2019 novel coronavirus spike protein by a SARS coronavirus-speciﬁc human monoclonal antibody. Emerg.
Microbes Infect. 2020, 9, 382–385. [CrossRef]

6.

5.

4. Wu, A.; Peng, Y.; Huang, B.; Ding, X.; Wang, X.; Niu, P.; Meng, J.; Zhu, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, J.; et al. Genome
composition and divergence of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) originating in China. Cell Host Microbe
2020, 27, 325–328. [CrossRef]
Rothan, H.A.; Byrareddy, S.N. The epidemiology and pathogenesis of coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak. J. Autoimmun. 2020, 26, 102433. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns
Hopkins University (JHU). Available online: https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.
html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6 (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Deng, S.Q.; Peng, H.J. Characteristics of and public health responses to the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak
in China. J. Clin. Med. 2020, 9, 575. [CrossRef]
Peng, X.; Xu, X.; Li, Y.; Cheng, L.; Zhou, X.; Ren, B. Transmission routes of 2019-nCoV and controls in dental
practice. Int. J. Oral. Sci. 2020, 12, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Xiao, Y.; Torok, M.E. Taking the right measures to control COVID-19. Lancet Infect. Dis. 2020. [CrossRef]

9.
10. Mitjà, O.; Clotet, B. Use of antiviral drugs to reduce COVID-19 transmission. Lancet Glob. Health 2020.

8.

7.

[CrossRef]

11. Gurwitz, D. Angiotensin receptor blockers as tentative SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics. Drug Dev. Res. 2020.

12.

[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shen, C.; Wang, Z.; Zhao, F.; Yang, Y.; Li, J.; Yuan, J.; Wang, F.; Li, D.; Yang, M.; Xing, L.; et al. Treatment of 5
critically Ill patients with COVID-19 with convalescent plasma. JAMA 2020. [CrossRef]

13. Menachery, V.D.; Gralinski, L.E.; Mitchell, H.D.; Dinnon, K.H., III; Leist, S.R.; Yount, B.L., Jr.; McAnarney, E.T.;
Graham, R.L.; Waters, K.M.; Baric, R.S. Combination attenuation oﬀers strategy for live attenuated coronavirus
vaccines. J. Virol. 2018, 92. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

14. Kotomina, T.; Isakova-Sivak, I.; Matyushenko, V.; Kim, K.H.; Lee, Y.; Jung, Y.J.; Kang, S.M.; Rudenko, L.
Recombinant live attenuated inﬂuenza vaccine viruses carrying CD8 T-cell epitopes of respiratory syncytial
virus protect mice against both pathogens without inﬂammatory disease. Antivir. Res. 2019, 168, 9–17.
[CrossRef]

15. Kobinger, G.P.; Figueredo, J.M.; Rowe, T.; Zhi, Y.; Gao, G.; Sanmiguel, J.C.; Bell, P.; Wivel, N.A.; Zitzow, L.A.;
Flieder, D.B.; et al. Adenovirus-based vaccine prevents pneumonia in ferrets challenged with the SARS
coronavirus and stimulates robust immune responses in macaques. Vaccine 2007, 25, 5220–5231. [CrossRef]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

15 of 19

16. Takano, T.; Yamada, S.; Doki, T.; Hohdatsu, T. Pathogenesis of oral type I feline infectious peritonitis virus
(FIPV) infection: Antibody-dependent enhancement infection of cats with type I FIPV via the oral route. J.
Vet. Med. Sci. 2019, 81, 911–915. [CrossRef]
Jiang, S. Don’t rush to deploy COVID-19 vaccines and drugs without suﬃcient safety guarantees. Nature
2020, 579, 321. [CrossRef]

17.

18. Wu, T.; Guan, J.; Handel, A.; Tscharke, D.C.; Sidney, J.; Sette, A.; Wakim, L.M.; Sng, X.Y.X.; Thomas, P.G.;
Croft, N.P.; et al. Quantiﬁcation of epitope abundance reveals the eﬀect of direct and cross-presentation on
inﬂuenza CTL responses. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 2846. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

19. Armbruster, N.; Jasny, E.; Petsch, B. Advances in RNA vaccines for preventive indications: A case study of

a vaccine against rabies. Vaccines 2019, 7, 132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

21.

20. CureVac Focuses on the Development of mRNA-based Coronavirus Vaccine to Protect People Worldwide.
Available online: https://www.curevac.com/news/curevac-focuses-on-the-development-of-mrna-based-
coronavirus-vaccine-to-protect-people-worldwide (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Safety and Immunogenicity Study of 2019-nCoV Vaccine (mRNA-1273) to Prevent SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
Available online: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04283461?term=vaccine&cond=coronavirus&draw=
2&rank=3 (accessed on 25 March 2020).
Safety and Immunity of Covid-19 aAPC Vaccine. Available online: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/
NCT04299724?term=vaccine&cond=coronavirus&draw=2&rank=6 (accessed on 25 March 2020).

22.

23. Mao, Q.Y.; Wang, Y.; Bian, L.; Xu, M.; Liang, Z. EV71 vaccine, a new tool to control outbreaks of hand, foot

and mouth disease (HFMD). Expert Rev. Vaccines 2016, 15, 599–606. [CrossRef]

24. Grifoni, A.; Sidney, J.; Zhang, Y.; Scheuermann, R.H.; Peters, B.; Sette, A. A sequence homology and
bioinformatic approach can predict candidate targets for immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host Microbe
2020. [CrossRef]

25. Walls, A.C.; Park, Y.J.; Tortorici, M.A.; Wall, A.; McGuire, A.T.; Veesler, D. Structure, function, and antigenicity

of the SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein. Cell 2020. [CrossRef]

26. Zhang, L.; Lin, D.; Sun, X.; Curth, U.; Drosten, C.; Sauerhering, L.; Becker, S.; Rox, K.; Hilgenfeld, R. Crystal
structure of SARS-CoV-2 main protease provides a basis for design of improved α-ketoamide inhibitors.
Science 2020. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Fischer, R.; Buyel, J.F. Molecular farming-The slope of enlightenment. Biotechnol. Adv. 2020, 16, 107519.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

27.

28. Tekoah, Y.; Shulman, A.; Kizhner, T.; Ruderfer, I.; Fux, L.; Nataf, Y.; Bartfeld, D.; Ariel, T.; Gingis-Velitski, S.;
Hanania, U.; et al. Large-scale production of pharmaceutical proteins in plant cell culture-the Protalix
experience. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2015, 13, 1199–1208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Salazar, J.A.; Bañuelos, B.; Rosales, S. Current status of viral expression systems in plants and perspectives
for oral vaccines development. Plant Mol. Biol. 2015, 87, 203–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

29.

30. García, A.L.; Rubio, N.; Moreno, L. Mucosal immunology and oral vaccination. In Genetically Engineered
Plants as a Source of Vaccines Against Widespread Diseases—An Integrated View; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2014;
pp. 15–42.

31. Bilichak, A.; Gaudet, D.; Laurie, J. Emerging genome engineering tools in crop research and breeding.

Methods Mol. Biol. 2020, 2072, 165–181.

32. Pogrebnyak, N.; Golovkin, M.; Andrianov, V.; Spitsin, S.; Smirnov, Y.; Egolf, R.; Koprowski, H. Severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) S protein production in plants: Development of recombinant vaccine. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2005, 102, 9062–9067. [CrossRef]

33. Li, H.Y.; Ramalingam, S.; Chye, M.L. Accumulation of recombinant SARS-CoV spike protein in plant cytosol
and chloroplasts indicate potential for development of plant-derived oral vaccines. Exp. Biol. Med. 2006, 231,
1346–1352. [CrossRef]

34. Zheng, N.; Xia, R.; Yang, C.; Yin, B.; Li, Y.; Duan, C.; Liang, L.; Guo, H.; Xie, Q. Boosted expression of the
SARS-CoV nucleocapsid protein in tobacco and its immunogenicity in mice. Vaccine 2009, 27, 5001–5007.
[CrossRef]

35. Demurtas, O.C.; Massa, S.; Illiano, E.; De Martinis, D.; Chan, P.K.; Di Bonito, P.; Franconi, R. Antigen
production in plant to tackle infectious diseases ﬂare up: The case of SARS. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 54.
[CrossRef]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

16 of 19

36. Daniell, H.; Chan, H.T.; Pasoreck, E.K. Vaccination via chloroplast genetics: Aﬀordable protein drugs for the
prevention and treatment of inherited or infectious human diseases. Annu. Rev. Genet. 2016, 23, 595–618.
[CrossRef]

37. Olejniczak, S.A.; Łojewska, E.; Kowalczyk, T.; Sakowicz, T. Chloroplasts: State of research and practical

applications of plastome sequencing. Planta 2016, 244, 517–527. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

38. Arai, Y.; Shikanai, T.; Doi, Y.; Yoshida, S.; Yamaguchi, I.; Nakashita, H. Production of polyhydroxybutyrate
by polycistronic expression of bacterial genes in tobacco plastid. Plant Cell Physiol. 2004, 45, 1176–1184.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Salazar, J.A.; Monreal, E.; Herrera, S.; Koop, H.U.; Rosales, S. Plastid-based expression strategie. In Genetically
Engineered Plants as a Source of Vaccines Against Wide Spread Diseases-An Integrated View; Springer: Berlin,
Germany, 2014; pp. 265–280.

39.

40. Peyret, H.; Lomonossoﬀ, G.P. When plant virology met Agrobacterium: The rise of the deconstructed clones.

Plant Biotechnol. J. 2015, 13, 1121–1135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

41. Govea-Alonso, D.O.; Cardineau, G.A.; Rosales-Mendoza, S. Principles of plant-based vaccines. In Genetically
Engineered Plants as a Source of Vaccines Against Wide Spread Diseases—An Integrated View; Mendoza, S.R., Ed.;
Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2014; ISBN 978-1-4939-0850-9.

42. McNulty, M.J.; Gleba, Y.; Tusé, D.; Hahn-Löbmann, S.; Giritch, A.; Nandi, S.; McDonald, K.A. Techno-economic
analysis of a plant-based platform for manufacturing antimicrobial proteins for food safety. Biotechnol. Prog.
2020, 36, 1–15. [CrossRef]

43. Peyret, H.; Brown, J.K.M.; Lomonossoﬀ, G.P. Improving plant transient expression through the rational

design of synthetic 5’ and 3’ untranslated regions. Plant Methods 2019, 15, 108. [CrossRef]

44. Márquez-Escobar, V.A.; Rosales-Mendoza, S.; Beltrán-López, J.I.; González-Ortega, O. Plant-based vaccines
against respiratory diseases: Current status and future prospects. Expert Rev. Vaccines 2017, 16, 137–149.
[CrossRef]

45. Hodgins, B.; Pillet, S.; Landry, N.; Ward, B.J. Prime-pull vaccination with a plant-derived virus-like particle
inﬂuenza vaccine elicits a broad immune response and protects aged mice from death and frailty after
challenge. Immun. Ageing 2019, 16, 27. [CrossRef]

46. Pillet, S.; Couillard, J.; Trépanier, S.; Poulin, J.F.; Yassine-Diab, B.; Guy, B.; Ward, B.J.; Landry, N.
Immunogenicity and safety of a quadrivalent plant-derived virus like particle inﬂuenza vaccine
candidate-Two randomized Phase II clinical trials in 18 to 49 and ≥50 years old adults. PLoS ONE
2019, 14, e0216533. [CrossRef]

47. Makarkov, A.I.; Golizeh, M.; Ruiz-Lancheros, E.; Gopal, A.; Costas-Cancelas, I.N.; Chierzi, S.; Pillet, S.;
Charland, N.; Landry, N.; Rouiller, I.; et al. Plant-derived virus-like particle vaccines drive cross-presentation
of inﬂuenza A hemagglutinin peptides by human monocyte-derived macrophages. NPJ Vaccines 2019, 4, 17.
[CrossRef]

48. Hodgins, B.; Pillet, S.; Landry, N.; Ward, B.J. A plant-derived VLP inﬂuenza vaccine elicits a balanced
immune response even in very old mice with co-morbidities. PLoS ONE 2019, 14, e0210009. [CrossRef]
49. Won, S.Y.; Hunt, K.; Guak, H.; Hasaj, B.; Charland, N.; Landry, N.; Ward, B.J.; Krawczyk, C.M. Characterization
of the innate stimulatory capacity of plant-derived virus-like particles bearing inﬂuenza hemagglutinin.
Vaccine 2018, 36, 8028–8038. [CrossRef]

50. Lindsay, B.J.; Bonar, M.M.; Costas-Cancelas, I.N.; Hunt, K.; Makarkov, A.I.; Chierzi, S.; Krawczyk, C.M.;
Landry, N.; Ward, B.J.; Rouiller, I. Morphological characterization of a plant-made virus-like particle vaccine
bearing inﬂuenza virus hemagglutinins by electron microscopy. Vaccine 2018, 36, 2147–2154. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

51. Rosales, S.; Salazar, J.A. Immunological aspects of using plant cells as delivery vehicles for oral vaccines.

Expert Rev. Vaccines 2014, 13, 737–749. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

52. Gleba, Y.; Klimyuk, V.; Marillonnet, S. Magnifection—A new platform for expressing recombinant vaccines

in plants. Vaccine 2005, 23, 2042–2048. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

53. Pniewski, T.; Milczarek, M.; Wojas-Turek, J.; Paitasz-Piasecka, E.; Wietrzyk, J.; Czyz, M. Plant lyophilisate
carrying S-HBsAg as an oral booster vaccine against HBV. Vaccine 2018, 36, 6070–6076. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Lee, M.F.; Chiang, C.H.; Li, Y.L.; Wang, N.M.; Song, P.P.; Lin, S.J.; Chen, Y.H. Oral edible plant vaccine
containing hypoallergen of American cockroach major allergen Per a 2 prevents roach-allergic asthma in
a murine model. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, 1–16. [CrossRef]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

17 of 19

55. Yusibov, V.; Streatﬁeld, S.J.; Kushnir, N. Clinical development of plant-produced recombinant pharmaceuticals:

Vaccines, antibodies and beyond. Hum. Vaccines 2011, 7, 313–321. [CrossRef]

56. Rigano, M.M.; Sala, F.; Arntzen, C.J.; Walmsley, A.M. Targeting of plant-derived vaccine antigens to

immunoresponsive mucosal sites. Vaccine 2003, 21, 809–811. [CrossRef]

57. Rosales, S.; Nieto, R. Green therapeutic biocapsules: Using plant cells to orally deliver biopharmaceuticals.

Trends Biotechnol. 2018, 36, 1054–1067. [CrossRef]

58. Rybicki, E.P. Plant molecular farming of virus-like nanoparticles as vaccines and reagents. Wiley Interdiscip.

Rev. Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2020, 12, e1587. [CrossRef]

59. Chargelegue, D.; Drake, P.M.; Obregon, P.; Prada, A.; Fairweather, N.; Ma, J.K. Highly immunogenic and
protective recombinant vaccine candidate expressed in transgenic plants. Infect. Immun. 2005, 73, 5915–5922.
[CrossRef]

60. Yeboah, A.; Cohen, R.I.; Rabolli, C.; Yarmush, M.L.; Berthiaume, F. Elastin-like polypeptides: A strategic

fusion partner for biologics. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2016, 113, 1617–1627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

61. Chansaenroj, J.; Chuchaona, W.; Thanusuwannasak, T.; Duang-In, A.; Puenpa, J.; Vutithanachot, V.;
Vongpunsawad, S.; Poovorawan, Y. Prevalence of poliovirus vaccine strains in randomized stool samples
from 2010 to 2018: Encompassing transition from the trivalent to bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine. Virusdisease
2019, 30, 201–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

62. Chabeda, A.; Van Zyl, A.R.; Rybicki, E.P.; Hitzeroth, I.I. Substitution of human papillomavirus type 16 L2
neutralizing epitopes into L1 surface loops: The Eﬀect on virus-like particle assembly and immunogenicity.
Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 779. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

63. Mbewana, S.; Meyers, A.E.; Rybicki, E.P. Chimaeric rift valley fever virus-like particle vaccine candidate

production in Nicotiana Benthamiana. Biotechnol. J. 2019, 14, e1800238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

64. Ruiz, V.; Baztarrica, J.; Rybicki, E.P.; Meyers, A.E.; Wigdorovitz, A. Minimally processed crude leaf extracts of
Nicotiana benthamiana containing recombinant foot and mouth disease virus-like particles are immunogenic
in mice. Biotechnol. Rep. (Amst) 2018, 20, e00283. [CrossRef]

65. Mortola, E.; Roy, P. Eﬃcient assembly and release of SARS coronavirus-like particles by a heterologous

expression system. FEBS Lett. 2004, 576, 174–178. [CrossRef]

66. Ho, Y.; Lin, P.H.; Liu, C.Y.; Lee, S.P.; Chao, Y.C. Assembly of human severe acute respiratory syndrome

coronavirus-like particles. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 318, 833–838. [CrossRef]

67. Lu, X.; Chen, Y.; Bai, B.; Hu, H.; Tao, L.; Yang, J.; Chen, J.; Chen, Z.; Hu, Z.; Wang, H. Immune responses
against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus induced by virus-like particles in mice. Immunology
2007, 122, 496–502. [CrossRef]

68. Bai, B.; Hu, Q.; Hu, H.; Zhou, P.; Shi, Z.; Meng, J.; Lu, B.; Huang, Y.; Mao, P.; Wang, H. Virus-like particles of
SARS-like coronavirus formed by membrane proteins from diﬀerent origins demonstrate stimulating activity
in human dendritic cells. PLoS ONE 2008, 3, e2685. [CrossRef]

69. Lu, B.; Huang, Y.; Huang, L.; Li, B.; Zheng, Z.; Chen, Z.; Chen, J.; Hu, Q.; Wang, H. Eﬀect of mucosal and
systemic immunization with virus-like particles of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus in mice.
Immunology 2010, 130, 254–261. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

70. Liu, Y.V.; Massare, M.J.; Barnard, D.L.; Kort, T.; Nathan, M.; Wang, L.; Smith, G. Chimeric severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) S glycoprotein and inﬂuenza matrix 1 eﬃciently form
virus-like particles (VLPs) that protect mice against challenge with SARS-CoV. Vaccine 2011, 29, 6606–6613.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

71. Wang, C.; Zheng, X.; Gai, W.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, H.; Wang, H.; Feng, N.; Chi, H.; Qiu, B.; Li, N.; et al.
MERS-CoV virus-like particles produced in insect cells induce speciﬁc humoural and cellular imminity in
rhesus macaques. Oncotarget 2017, 8, 12686–12694. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

72. Kato, T.; Takami, Y.; Deo, V.K.; Park, E.Y. Preparation of virus-like particle mimetic nanovesicles displaying
the S protein of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus using insect cells. J. Biotechnol. 2019, 306,
177–184. [CrossRef]

73. Kost, T.A.; Condreay, J.P.; Jarvis, D.L. Baculovirus as versatile vectors for protein expression in insect and

mammalian cells. Rev. Nat. Biotechnol. 2005, 23, 567–575. [CrossRef]

74. Altmann, F.; Schwihla, H.; Staudacher, E.; Glössl, J.; März, L. Insect cells contain an unusual, membrane-bound
beta-N-acetylglucosaminidase probably involved in the processing of protein N-glycans. J. Biol. Chem. 1995,
270, 17344–17349. [CrossRef]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

18 of 19

75. COVID-19: Medicago’s Development Programs. Available online: https://www.medicago.com/en/covid-19-

programs/ (accessed on 25 March 2020).

76. Masters, P.S. The molecular biology of coronaviruses. Adv. Virus Res. 2006, 66, 193–292.
77.

Stephen, S.L.; Beales, L.; Peyret, H.; Roe, A.; Stonehouse, N.J.; Rowlands, D.J. Recombinant expression of
tandem-HBc virus-like particles (VLPs). Methods Mol. Biol. 2018, 1776, 97–123.

78. Balke, I.; Zeltins, A. Recent advances in the use of plant virus-like particles as vaccines. Viruses 2020, 12, 270.

[CrossRef]

79. Lerouge, P.; Bardor, M.; Pagny, S.; Gomord, V.; Faye, L. N-glycosylation of recombinant pharmaceutical
glycoproteins produced in transgenic plants: Towards an humanisation of plant N-glycans. Curr. Pharm.
Biotechnol. 2000, 1, 347–354. [CrossRef]

80. Hamorsky, K.T.; Kouokam, J.C.; Jurkiewicz, J.M.; Nelson, B.; Moore, L.J.; Husk, A.S.; Kajiura, H.; Fujiyama, K.;
Matoba, N. N-glycosylation of cholera toxin B subunit in Nicotiana benthamiana: Impacts on host stress
response, production yield and vaccine potential. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 8003. [CrossRef]
Schähs, M.; Strasser, R.; Stadlmann, J.; Kunert, R.; Rademacher, T.; Steinkellner, H. Production of
J. 2007,
a monoclonalantibody in plants with a humanized N-glycosylation pattern. Plant Biotechnol.
5, 657–663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

81.

82. Wang, Q.; Zhang, L.; Kuwahara, K.; Li, L.; Liu, Z.; Li, T.; Zhu, H.; Liu, J.; Xu, Y.; Xie, J.; et al. Immunodominant
SARS coronavirus epitopes in humans elicited both enhancing and neutralizing eﬀects on infection in
non-human primates. ACS Infect. Dis. 2016, 2, 361–376. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

83. Tang, X.; Wu, C.; Li, X.; Song, Y.; Yao, X.; Wu, X.; Duan, Y.; Zhang, H.; Wang, Y.; Qian, Z.; et al. On the origin

and continuing evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Natl. Sci. Rev. 2020. [CrossRef]

84. Phan, T. Genetic diversity and evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Infect. Genet. Evol. 2020, 81, 104260. [CrossRef]
85. Channappanavar, R.; Fett, C.; Zhao, J.; Meyerholz, D.K.; Perlman, S. Virus-speciﬁc memory CD8 T cells
provide substantial protection from lethal severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. J. Virol.
2014, 88, 11034–11044. [CrossRef]
Freytag, L.C.; Clements, J.D. Mucosal adjuvants. Vaccine 2005, 23, 1804–1813. [CrossRef]

86.
87. Mason, H.S.; Haq, T.A.; Clements, J.D.; Arntzen, C.J. Edible vaccine protects mice against Escherichia
coli heat-labile enterotoxin (LT): Potatoes expressing a synthetic LT-B gene. Vaccine 1998, 16, 1336–1343.
[CrossRef]

88. Govea, D.O.; Rubio, N.; García, A.L.; Varona, J.T.; Korban, S.S.; Moreno, L.; Rosales, S. Immunogenic

properties of a lettuce-derived C4(V3)6 multiepitopic HIV protein. Planta 2013, 238, 785–792. [CrossRef]

89. Trujillo, E.; Rosales, S.; Angulo, C. A multi-epitope plant-made chimeric protein (LTBentero) targeting
common enteric pathogens is immunogenic in mice. Plant Mol. Biol. 2020, 102, 159–169. [CrossRef]
90. Orellana, L.; Rosales, S.; Romero, A.; Parsons, J.; Decker, E.L.; Monreal, E.; Moreno, L.; Reski, R. An Env-derived
multi-epitope HIV chimeric protein produced in the moss Physcomitrella patens is immunogenic in mice.
Plant Cell Rep. 2015, 34, 425–433. [CrossRef]

91. Monreal, E.; Bañuelos, B.; Hernández, M.; Fragoso, G.; Garate, T.; Sciutto, E.; Rosales, S. Expression of
multiple Taenia Solium Immunogens in plant cells through a ribosomal skip mechanism. Mol. Biotechnol.
2015, 57, 635–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Jong, J.M.; Schuurhiuis, D.; Joan-Facsinay, A.; van der Voort, E.; Huizinga, T.; Ossendorp, F.; Toes, R.;
Verbeek, J. Murine Fc receptors for IgG are redundant in facilitating presentation of immune complex derived
antigen to CD8+ T cells in vivo. Mol. Immunol. 2006, 43, 2045–2050. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

92.

93. Marusi´c-Galesi´c, S.; Marusi´c, M.; Pokri´c, B. Cellular immune response to the antigen administered as

an immune complex in vivo. Immunology 1992, 75, 325–329. [PubMed]

94. Diamos, A.G.; Hunter, J.G.L.; Pardhe, M.D.; Rosenthal, S.H.; Sun, H.; Foster, B.C.; DiPalma, M.P.; Chen, Q.;
Mason, H.S. High level production of monoclonal antibodies using an optimized plant expression system.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 7, 472. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

95. Pepponi, I.; Diogo, G.R.; Stylianou, E.; van Dolleweerd, C.J.; Drake, P.M.W.; Paul, M.J.; Sibley, L.; Ma, J.K.-C.;
Reljic, R. Plant-derived recombinant immune complexes as self-adjuvanting TB immunogens for mucosal
boosting of BCG. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2014, 12, 840–850. [CrossRef]

96. Phoolcharoen, W.; Bhoo, S.H.; Lai, H.; Ma, J.; Arntzen, C.J.; Chen, Q.; Mason, H.S. Expression of
an immunogenic Ebola immune complex in Nicotiana benthamiana. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2011, 9, 807–816.
[CrossRef]

Vaccines 2020, 8, 183

19 of 19

97.

98.

Floss, D.M.; Schallau, K.; Rose-John, S.; Conrad, U.; Scheller, J. Elastin-like polypeptides revolutionize protein
expression and their biomedical application. Trends Biotechnol. 2010, 28, 37–45. [CrossRef]
Floss, D.M.; Mockey, M.; Zanello, G.; Brosson, D.; Diogon, M.; Frutos, R.; Bruel, T.; Rodrigues, V.; Garzon, E.;
Chevaleyre, C.; et al. Expression and immunogenicity of the mycobacterial Ag85B/ESAT-6 antigens produced
in transgenic plants by elastin-like peptide fusion strategy. Biomed. Biotechnol. 2010, 274346. [CrossRef]
99. Phan, H.T.; Pohl, J.; Floss, D.M.; Rabenstein, F.; Veits, J.; Le, B.T.; Chu, H.H.; Hause, G.; Mettenleiter, T.;
Conrad, U. ELPylated haemagglutinins produced in tobacco plants induce potentially neutralizing antibodies
against H5N1 viruses in mice. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2013, 11, 582–593. [CrossRef]

100. Li, H.Y.; Chye, M.L. Use of GFP to investigate expression of plant-derived vaccines. Methods Mol. Biol. 2009,

515, 275–285.

101. Rubio, N.; Govea, D.O.; Romero, A.; García, A.L.; Ilhuicatzi, D.; Salazar, J.A.; Korban, S.S.; Rosales-Mendoza, S.;
Moreno-Fierros, L. A plant-derived Multi-HIV antigen induces broad immune responses in orally immunized
mice. Mol. Biotechnol. 2015, 57, 622–674.

102. Andrew, M.K.; Bowles, S.K.; Pawelec, G.; Haynes, L.; Kuchel, G.A.; McNeil, S.A.; McElhaney, J.E. Inﬂuenza
vaccination in older adults: Recent innovations and practical applications. Drugs Aging 2019, 36, 29–37.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

103. Miquel-Clopés, A.; Bentley, E.G.; Stewart, J.P.; Carding, S.R. Mucosal vaccines and technology. Clin. Exp.

Immunol. 2019, 196, 205–214. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
iBio. Available online: https://www.ibioinc.com/ (accessed on 25 March 2020).

104.
105. Chan, H.T.; Xiao, Y.; Weldon, W.C.; Oberste, S.M.; Chumakov, K.; Daniell, H. Cold chain and virus-free
chloroplast-made booster vaccine to confer immunity against diﬀerent poliovirus serotypes. Plant Biotechnol.
J. 2016, 14, 2190–2200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

106. Margolin, E.; Chapman, R.; Meyers, A.E.; van Diepen, M.T.; Ximba, P.; Hermanus, T.; Crowther, C.; Weber, B.;
Morris, L.; Williamson, A.L.; et al. Production and immunogenicity of soluble plant-produced HIV-1 subtype
C envelope gp140 immunogens. Front. Plant Sci. 2019, 10, 1378. [CrossRef]

107. Kardani, K.; Bolhassani, A.; Shahbazi, S. Prime-boost vaccine strategy against viral infections: Mechanisms

and beneﬁts. Vaccine 2016, 34, 413–423. [CrossRef]

© 2020 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

