Early release, published at www.cmaj.ca on April 15, 2020. Subject to revision.
 

COMMENTARY     MENTAL HEALTH

Mitigating the psychological effects of COVID-19 
on health care workers

Peter E. Wu MD MSc, Rima Styra MD MEd, Wayne L. Gold MD

n Cite as: CMAJ 2020. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.200519; early-released April 15, 2020

A lthough  tremendous  efforts  are  being  made  to  investi-

gate  the  pathophysiology,  clinical  outcomes  and  treat-
ment  of  coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID-19),  the  psy-
chological  effects  of  this  pandemic  on  health  care  workers 
cannot be overlooked. 

Experience from the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome 
(SARS) outbreak and early reports related to COVID-19 show that 
health care workers experience considerable anxiety, stress and 
fear.1,2 The psychological effects related to the current pandemic 
are  driven  by  many  factors,  including  uncertainty  about  the 
duration of the crisis, lack of proven therapies or a vaccine, and 
potential shortages of health care resources, including personal 
protective equipment. Health care workers are also distressed by 
the effects of social distancing balanced against the desire to be 
present  for  their  families,  and  the  possibility  of  personal  and 
family  illness.  All  of  these  concerns  are  amplified  by  the  rapid 
availability  of  information  and  misinformation  on  the  Internet 
and social media.

Health  care  workers  may  experience  psychological  distress 
from  providing  direct  care  to  patients  with  COVID-19,  knowing 
someone  who  has  contracted  or  died  of  the  disease,  or  being 
required to undergo quarantine or isolation.1–3 Mitigation strate-
gies  for  all  scenarios  are  vital  to  ensure  psychological  wellness 
and in turn ensure a healthy and robust clinical workforce.

Not  surprisingly,  providers  caring  for  patients  with  COVID-19 
are among those at greatest risk of psychologic distress. A survey 
of  1257  nurses  and  physicians  caring  for  patients  with  the  dis-
ease in China found that these providers (41.5% of respondents) 
had  significantly  more  depression,  anxiety,  insomnia  and  dis-
tress  than  providers  who  did  not  care  directly  for  patients.1 
Another  observational  study  of  180  health  care  workers  provid-
ing  direct  care  for  patients  with  COVID-19  found  substantial 
 levels of anxiety and stress that adversely influenced sleep qual-
ity  and  self-efficacy.4  Importantly,  those  who  reported  a  strong 
social support network had a lower degree of stress and anxiety, 
and a higher level of self-efficacy.4 A qualitative study of medical 
residents during the 2003 SARS outbreak in Toronto showed that 
anxieties  around  personal  safety  and  risk  of  contagion  to  loved 
ones  conflicted  with  their   professional  duty  to  care.5  This  high-
lights the complexity of issues faced by health care workers and 

KEY POINTS
• Health care workers may experience considerable psychologic 
distress as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic due to providing 
direct patient care, vicarious trauma, quarantine or self-
isolation.

• Strong leadership with clear, honest and open communication

is needed to offset fears and uncertainties.

• Provision of adequate resources (e.g., medical supplies) and 

mental health supports will bolster individual self-efficacy and 
confidence.

• Leveraging online technology will allow delivery of psychosocial 

supports while preserving physical distancing.

• Emphasizing the altruism of working in health care and serving 
of the greater good will help health care workers to be reminded 
of their purpose in a time of crisis.

the  dissonance  they  are  required  to  reconcile.  Providers  not 
directly  caring  for  patients  with  COVID-19  are  not  immune  to 
 psychologic effects and may have vicarious trauma at levels simi-
lar  to  the  general  public.6  It  has  been  postulated  that  this  may 
relate to their concerns for patients with the disease, their at-risk 
colleagues,6 and for themselves and their families.

A letter to the editor of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences7 
and a qualitative study conducted in a teaching hospital during 
the SARS outbreak8 described measures to mitigate the psycho-
social impact on health care workers and identified themes that 
commonly arose in other studies exploring this issue. Clear and 
rapid  hospital  communication  was  helpful  to  address  the  reac-
tions  of  health  care  workers  based  on  uncertainty  or  fear.8  Fre-
quent  communication,  without  being  overly  reassuring,  was 
identified as helpful.5,7,8 Leadership at the hospital level, infection 
prevention  and  control  services,  and  other  supervising  bodies 
need  to  be  transparent  and  flexible,  acknowledge  uncertainty 
and provide clear evidence-based plans that will bolster workers’ 
trust, confidence and self-efficacy. This includes direction about 
hospital  processes  and  appropriate  provision  of  supplies  and 
equipment, particularly in the face of potential shortages.2,5,7,8 

Psychiatric support was offered to health care workers during 
the SARS outbreak, at first informally and then through confidential 

© 2020 Joule Inc. or its licensors 

CMAJ 

1

All editorial matter in CMAJ represents the opinions of the authors and not necessarily those of the Can adian Medical Association or its subsidiaries.Box 1: Resources for support of health care workers
•  Canadian Medical Association: Provincial Physician Health Program. 

Available: www.cma.ca/provincial-physician-health-program
•  Canadian Psychological Association: Psychology works for 
COVID-19. Psychologists giving back to front line service 
providers. Available: https://cpa.ca/corona-virus/psychservices/

•  Canadian Medical Association: Maintaining your and your 

family’s well-being during a pandemic. Available: www.cma.ca/
maintaining-your-and-your-familys-well-being-during-pandemic

telephone lines and drop-in centres.8 The current need for physical 
distancing necessitates adjustments to these supportive interven-
tions by leveraging today’s technology (e.g., online video and audio 
capabilities). At the end of March 2020, mental health workers in 
Ontario established free confidential services via online registration 
for  health  care  workers  who  care  for  patients  with  COVID-19.9 
 System-level  changes  (i.e.,  safe  hospital  policies  and  adequate 
resource provision) are likely to have more far-reaching effects than 
individual support, especially since capacity to counsel large num-
bers  of  affected  health  care  workers  may  be  limited.  Box  1  lists 
select resources for health care workers who are seeking psycho-
logical support.

A rapid review of existing evidence found that health care work-
ers who are self-isolating or under quarantine report symptoms of 
posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, stigmatization and fear 
of  financial  loss.3  Failure  to  ensure  appropriate  support  could 
result in underreporting of symptoms and increase the risk of in-
hospital  transmission  from  those  who  work  while  sick  against 
advice. A strong social support network can offset feelings of isola-
tion.3  Video  calls  and  virtual  meetings  allow  for  maintenance  of 
social relations while preserving physical distancing. Other miti-
gating interventions include delivery of general and medical sup-
plies,  limiting  isolation  to  the  shortest  duration  necessary,  and 
emphasizing that altruism and serving of the greater good are core 
values  of  the  profession.3  Medical  students  across  Canada  are 
showing altruism as they offer their services (e.g., running errands, 
delivering groceries and providing child care) to health care work-
ers in need,10 as well as volunteering to assist with contact trac-
ing.11 All these interventions can reduce the effect of quarantine or 
isolation and help to preserve wellness and fitness in health care 
workers so that they can return to work when able.

Supporting health care workers in all aspects is vital to sustain-
ing a healthy workforce during the pandemic in Canada. Taking care 
of ourselves is vital so that we may continue to take care of others.

References
  1.  Lai  J,  Ma  S,  Wang  Y,  et  al.  Factors  associated  with  mental  health  outcomes 
among health care workers exposed to coronavirus disease 2019. JAMA Netw 
Open 2020;3:e203976.

  2.  Styra R, Hawryluck L, Robinson S, et al. Impact on health care workers employed 
in  high-risk  areas  during  the  Toronto  SARS  outbreak.  J  Psychosom  Res 
2008;64:177-83.

  3.  Brooks SK, Webster RK, Smith LE, et al. The psychological impact of quarantine 
and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence. Lancet 2020; 395:912-20.

  4.  Xiao H, Zhang Y, Kong D, et al. The effects of social support on sleep quality of 
medical  staff  treating  patients  with  coronavirus  disease  2019  (COVID-19)  in 
January and February 2020 in China. Med Sci Monit 2020;26:e923549.

  5.  Rambaldini G, Wilson K, Rath D, et al. The impact of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome on medical house staff: a qualitative study. J Gen Intern Med 2005;20: 
381-5.

  6.  Li Z, Ge J, Yang M, et al. Vicarious traumatization in the general public, members, 
and  non-members  of  medical  teams  aiding  in  COVID-19  control.  Brain Behav 
Immun 2020 Mar. 10;pii:S0889-1591(20)30309-3.

  7. 

Imai H. Trust is a key factor in the willingness of health professionals to work 
during the COVID-19 outbreak: experience from the H1N1 pandemic in Japan 
2009 [letter]. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2020 Feb. 27. [Epub ahead of print]. doi: 
10.1111/pcn.12995.

  8.  Maunder R, Hunter J, Vincent L, et al. The immediate psychological and occu-
pational  impact  of  the  2003  SARS  outbreak  in  a  teaching  hospital.  CMAJ 
2003;168:1245-51.

  9.  King  A.  Hundreds  of  mental  health  workers  offer  free  therapy  to  Ontario’s 
frontline COVID-19 staff. CBC News 2020 Mar. 26. Available: www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/toronto/free-therapy-covid-19-health-workers-1.5510435  (accessed 
2020 Apr. 6).

10.  Vendeville G. As COVID-19 battle escalates, U of T students offer busy health-
care  workers  help  on  the  home  front.  U  of  T  News  2020  Mar.  19.  Available:  
https://uoft.me/5f0 (accessed 2020 Apr. 6).

11.  Edwardson  L.  University  of  Calgary  medical  students  quadruple  province’s 
COVID-19  contact-tracing  capacity.  CBC  News  2020  Mar.  25.  Available:  www.
cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/u-of-c-covid-19-contact-tracing-1.5509022?__vfz 
=medium%3Dsharebar (accessed 2020 Apr. 6).

Competing interests: None declared.

This article has not been peer reviewed. 

Affiliations: Division of General Internal Medicine (Wu, Gold), Divi-
sion  of  Infectious  Diseases  (Gold)  and  Department  of  Psychiatry 
(Styra),  University  Health  Network;  Department  of  Medicine  (Wu, 
Gold) and Department of Psychiatry (Styra), University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ont. 

Contributors: Peter Wu wrote the original draft of the manuscript. 
All of the authors contributed to the conception of the work, curated 
the data, critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual 
content,  gave  final  approval  of  the  version  to  be  published  and 
agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the work.  

Correspondence to: Peter Wu, peter.wu@uhn.ca

2 

CMAJ 

COMMENTARY