Since the outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus infection (2019-nCoV) in Wuhan City, China, by January 30, 2020, a total of 9692 
confirmed cases and 15,238 suspected cases have been reported around 31 provinces or cities in China. Among the confirmed 
cases, 1527 were severe cases, 171 had recovered and been discharged at home, and 213 died. And among these cases, a total 
of 28 children aged from 1 month to 17 years have been reported in China. For standardizing prevention and management of 
2019-nCoV infections in children, we called up an experts’ committee to formulate this experts’ consensus statement. This 
statement is based on the Novel Coronavirus Infection Pneumonia Diagnosis and Treatment Standards (the fourth edition) 
(National Health Committee) and other previous diagnosis and treatment strategies for pediatric virus infections. The present 
consensus statement summarizes current strategies on diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of 2019-nCoV infection in children.

Background

In December, 2019, a cluster of pneumonia cases, who were 
later proven to be caused by a novel coronavirus (named as 
“2019-nCoV”), emerged in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, 
China. By January 30, 2020, 9692 confirmed cases and 
15,238 suspected cases have been reported around 31 prov-
inces and cities in China. Among the confirmed cases, 1527 
were severe cases, 171 had recovered and been discharged 

All authors contributed equally to this paper.

kunlingshen1717@163.com

 *  Kunling Shen 
 
 *  Yonghong Yang 
 
 *  Dongchi Zhao 
 

yyh628628@sina.com

zhao_wh2004@hotmail.com

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

at home, and 213 died. Twenty-eight confirmed cases aged 
from 1 month to 17 years had been reported in China [1].

Coronavirus (CoV) belongs to the Coronaviridae fam-
ily, Nidovirales order. CoVs are divided into four genera: 
α-, β-, γ-, and δ-coronavirus. α- and β-coronaviruses only 
infect mammals, whereas γ- and δ-coronaviruses mainly 
infect birds, with a few infecting mammals. Human CoVs 
include α-coronaviruses (229E and NL63), β-coronaviruses 
(OC43 and HKU1), the Middle East respiratory syndrome-
related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), severe acute respiratory 
syndrome-related  coronavirus  (SARS-CoV),  and  2019-
nCoV. The 2019-nCoV belongs to the β-coronavirus genus 
[2], which includes bat-SARS-like (SL)-CoVZC45, bat-
SL-CoVZXC21, SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and 2019-nCoV. 
Current studies have revealed that 2019-nCoV may originate 
from wild animals, but the exact origin remains unclear.

2019-nCoV  infected  patients  are  the  main  infection 
sources.  However,  we  also  should  attach  importance  to 
asymptomatic cases which may play a critical role in the 

Vol.:(0123456789)1 3 

World Journal of Pediatrics

transmission process. Respiratory droplets and contact are the 
main transmission routes [3]. Close contact with symptomatic 
cases and asymptomatic cases with silent infection are the 
main transmission routes of 2019-nCoV infection in children.
People of all ages are susceptible to 2019-nCoV. The 
elderly and those with underlying chronic diseases are more 
likely to become severe cases. Thus far, all pediatric cases 
with laboratory-confirmed 2019-nCoV infection were mild 
cases, and no deaths had been reported.

For standardizing the prevention and treament of 2019-
nCoV infections in children, we called up an experts’ com-
mittee to formulate this consensus statement. This statement 
is based on the Novel Coronavirus Infection Pneumonia 
Diagnosis and Treatment Standards (the fourth edition) 
(National Health Committee) and other previous diagnosis 
and treatment strategies for pediatric virus infections.

Auxiliary examinations

Laboratory examination [3]

1.  In the early phase of the disease, white blood cell count 
is  normal  or  decreased,  with  decreased  lymphocyte 
count; liver enzymes, muscle enzymes, and myohemo-
globin levels are increased in some patients.

2.  Most patients display elevated C-reactive protein level 
and erythrocyte sedimentation rates, and normal proc-
alcitonin levels.

3.  Severe cases show high D-dimer levels and progres-

sively decreased blood lymphocytes counts.

4.  Samples from throat swabs (better using nasopharyn-
geal swab in children), sputum, lower respiratory tract 
secretions, stool and blood, etc. are tested positive for 
2019-nCoV nucleic acids.

Clinical manifestations

Chest imaging examination [3]

Based on the current epidemiological data, the incubation 
period of 2019-nCoV infections ranges from 1 to 14 days, 
mostly ranging from 3 to 7 days. Current reported data of 
pediatric cases revealed that the age of disease onset ranged 
from 1.5 months to 17 years, most of whom had a close 
contact with infected cases or were family cluster cases [4]. 
Infected children might appear asymptomatic [5] or present 
with fever, dry cough, and fatigue, and few have upper res-
piratory symptoms including nasal congestion and running 
nose; some patients presented with gastrointestinal symp-
toms including abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, and diarrhea.

Most infected children have mild clinical manifestations. 
They have no fever or symptoms of pneumonia with a good 
prognosis. Most of them recover within 1–2 weeks after disease 
onset. Few may progress to lower respiratory infections. No 
newborns delivered by 2019-nCoV infected mothers have been 
detected positive; and no newborn cases have been reported 
yet. It should be noted that clinical manifestations in pediatric 
patients should be further defined after collecting more pediat-
ric case data. Furthermore, the number of confirmed infected 
cases will increase after a wide use of pathogen analysis.

Data from adults reveal that severe cases often develop 
dyspnea one week after disease onset. Severe cases may rap-
idly progress to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 
septic shock, refractory metabolic acidosis, and coagulation 
dysfunction [6, 7]. Although no deaths in children have been 
reported up to now, the potential risk of death should be 
highlighted. Though clinical symptoms in pediatric patients 
are relatively milder compared with those in adult patients, 
ARDS and death cases also occurred in infected children 
during the SARS and MERS epidemics [8–11].

Suspected cases or confirmed cases should undertake chest 
X-ray examination as soon as possible. Chest CT scan is 
required when necessary. In the early stage of disease, chest 
images show multiple small plaques and interstitial changes, 
which are obvious in the lung periphery, further deteriorate 
to bilateral multiple ground-glass opacity and/or infiltrat-
ing shadows. Lung consolidation may occur in severe cases. 
Pleural effusion is rarely seen.

Diagnosis

Suspected cases

2019-nCoV should be suspected in patients who meet any 
one of the criteria in the epidemiological history and any two 
of the criteria in clinical manifestations.

Epidemiological history

1.  Children with a travel or residence history in Wuhan 
city and neighboring areas, or other areas with persistent 
local transmission within 14 days prior to disease onset;
2.  Children with a history of contacting patients with fever 
or respiratory symptoms who have a history of contact 
with patients from Wuhan city and neighboring areas, 
or other areas with persistent local transmission within 
14 days prior to disease onset;

3.  Children who are related with a cluster outbreak or close 

contact with 2019-nCoV infected cases;

4.  Newborns delivered by confirmed 2019-nCoV-infected 

mothers.

1 3World Journal of Pediatrics 

Clinical manifestations

1.  Fever, fatigue, dry cough; some pediatric patients may 

have low-grade fever or no fever;

2.  With above-mentioned chest imaging findings (refer to 

the section of Chest imaging examination);

3.  In the early phase of the disease, white blood cell count 
is normal or decreased, or with decreased lymphocyte 
count;

4.  No other pathogens are detected which can fully explain 

the clinical manifestations.

Confirmed cases

Suspected cases who meet any one of the following criteria [3]:

1.  Respiratory tract or blood samples tested positive for 

2019-nCoV nucleic acid using RT-PCR;

2.  Genetic sequencing of respiratory tract or blood samples 
is highly homologous with the known 2019-nCoV.

Clinical classifications

1.  Asymptomatic infection (silent infection)
 

  Children tested positive for 2019-nCoV, but without 
manifestations of clinical symptoms or abnormal chest 
imaging findings.

2.  Acute upper respiratory tract infection
 

  Children with only fever, cough, pharyngeal pain, 
nasal congestion, fatigue, headache, myalgia or dis-
comfort, etc., and without signs of pneumonia by chest 
imaging or sepsis.

3.  Mild pneumonia
 

  Children with or without fever, respiratory symptoms 
such as cough; and chest imaging indicating pneumonia, 
but not reaching the criteria of severe pneumonia.

4.  Severe pneumonia
 

  Meeting any of the following criteria [3, 12–15]:

5.  Critical cases
 

  Those who meet any of the following criteria and 
require ICU care:

(1)  Respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation;
(2)  Shock;
(3)  Combined with other organs failure.

Early identification of critical cases

According to the experiences in diagnosis and treatment of 
community-acquired pneumonia in children, children with 
a history of contact with severe 2019-nCoV infected cases, 
or with underlying conditions (such as congenital heart 
disease, bronchial pulmonary hypoplasia, respiratory tract 
anomaly, with abnormal hemoglobin level, severe malnutri-
tion), or with immune deficiency or immunocompromised 
status (under long-term use of immunosuppressants) who 
meet any one of the following criteria may become severe 
cases:

1.  Dyspnea:  respiratory  rate  > 50  times/min  for 
2–12 months old; > 40 times/min for 1–5 years old; > 30 
times/min in patients over 5 years old (after ruling out 
the effects of fever and crying);
2.  Persistent high fever for 3–5 days;
3.  Poor  mental  response,  lethargy,  disturbance  of  con-

sciousness, and other changes of consciousness;

4.  Abnormally increased enzymatic indexes, such as myo-
cardial enzymes, liver enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase;

5.  Unexplainable metabolic acidosis;
6.  Chest imaging findings indicating bilateral or multi-lobe 
infiltration, pleural effusion, or rapid progression of con-
ditions during a very short period;

7.  Infants younger than 3 months;
8.  Extrapulmonary complications;
9.  Coinfection with other viruses and/or bacteria.

(1)  Increased  respiratory  rate: ≥ 70  times/min 
(< 1 year), ≥ 50 times/min (≥ 1 year) (after ruling 
out the effects of fever and crying);

(2)  Oxygen saturation < 92%;
(3)  Hypoxia: assisted breathing (moans, nasal flaring, 
and three concave sign), cyanosis, intermittent 
apnea;

(4)  Disturbance of consciousness: somnolence, coma, 

(5)  Food refusal or feeding difficulty, with signs of 

or convulsion;

dehydration.

Differential diagnosis [3]

Differential diagnosis should be made to distinguish from 
influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, respira-
tory syncytial virus, rhinovirus, human metapneumovirus, 
SARS coronavirus, and other known viral infections, as 
well as mycoplasma pneumoniae and chlamydia pneumo-
nia and bacterial pneumonia. The coinfection of 2019-nCoV 
with other viruses and/or bacteria should be considered in 
diagnosis.

1 3 

Treatment

Treatment locations

1.  Based on their medical conditions, suspected patients 
should be isolated in a single room or self-isolated at 
home following the doctors’ advice.

2.  Confirmed cases can be admitted in the same ward.
3.  Critically cases should be admitted to ICU as soon as 

possible.

General treatment

The general treatment strategies include bed rest and sup-
portive  treatment;  ensuring  sufficient  calory  and  water 
intake; maintaining water electrolyte balance and homeo-
stasis; monitoring vital signs and oxygen saturation; keep-
ing respiratory tract unobstructed and inhaling oxygen when 
necessary; measuring blood routine, urine routine, C-reac-
tive protein, and other blood biochemical indexes including 
liver and kidney function, myocardial enzyme spectrum, 
and coagulation function according to patients’ conditions. 
Blood gas analysis and timely re-examination of chest imag-
ing should be performed when necessary.

Symptomatic treatment

The patients with high fever should be actively controlled. 
If patients’ body temperature exceeds 38.5 °C with obvi-
ous discomfort, physical cooling (warm water bath, use of 
antipyretic patch, etc.) or antipyretic drug treatment should 
be performed. Common drugs include: ibuprofen orally, 
5–10 mg/kg every time; acetaminophen orally, 10–15 mg/kg 
every time. Keep children quiet and administrate sedatives 
immediately when convulsions or seizure occur.

Oxygen therapy

When hypoxia appears, effective oxygen therapy should 
be given immediately including nasal catheter, mask oxy-
gen. Nasal high-flow oxygen therapy, and non-invasive or 
invasive mechanical ventilation should be undertaken when 
necessary.

Antiviral therapy

Interferon‑α [3, 16–28]

World Journal of Pediatrics

experiences of using interferon-α in treating bronchiolitis, 
viral pneumonia, acute upper respiratory tract infection, 
hand foot mouth disease, SARS, and other viral infections 
in children, the recommended usage is as follows:

1.  Interferon-α  nebulization:  interferon-α  200,000–
400,000 IU/kg or 2–4 μg/kg in 2 mL sterile water, nebu-
lization two times per day for 5–7 days;

2.  Interferon-α2b spray: applied for high-risk populations 
with a close contact with suspected 2019-nCoV infected 
patients or those in the early phase with only upper res-
piratory tract symptoms. Patients should use 1–2 sprays 
on each side of the nasal cavity, 8–10 sprays on the oro-
pharynx, the dose of interferon-α2b per injection is 8000 
IU, once every 1–2 hours, 8–10 sprays/day for a course 
of 5–7 days.

Lopinavir/litonavir [3, 29, 30]

Lopinavir/litonavir has been tried to apply to the treatment 
of adult patients with 2019-nCoV pneumonia, but its effi-
cacy and safety remain to be determined.

Usage of other agents

Antibiotics [3, 12]

Avoiding irrational use of antibiotics, especially in combina-
tion with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Paying close attention 
to the changes of conditions in children with coinfection of 
bacterial or fungal infection; actively collecting samples for 
pathogen analysis and timely or rational use of antibiotics 
or anti-fungal drugs.

Arbidol [31], oseltamivir [32] and other anti‑influenza drugs

Arbidol is administrated for adults infected with 2019-nCoV; 
however, its efficacy and safety remain unclear. Oseltamivir 
and other anti-influenza agents can be applied for patients 
coinfected with other influenza virus.

Other drugs [3, 12]

Glucocorticoids

Interferon-α  can  reduce  viral  load  in  the  early  stage  of 
infection which can help to alleviate symptoms and shorten 
the course of disease. Based on our clinical research and 

The use of glucocorticoids should be based on the severity 
of systemic inflammatory response, degree of dyspnea, with 
or without ARDS, and the progress status of chest imag-
ing results. Glucocorticoids can be used in a short period 

1 3World Journal of Pediatrics 

(3–5 days). The recommended dose of methylprednisolone 
should not exceed 1–2 mg/kg/day.

Immunoglobulin

Immunoglobulin can be used in severe cases when indicated, 
but its efficacy needs further evaluation.

Treatment of severe and critically ill cases [3, 12]

On the basis of symptomatic treatment, we should actively 
prevent and treat complications, underlying diseases, sec-
ondary infection, and provide organ function support as 
indicated.

Respiratory support

Children who undergo non-invasive mechanical ventilation 
for 2 hours without improvements in conditions, or cannot 
tolerate  non-invasive  ventilation,  with  increased  airway 
secretions, severe cough, or hemodynamic instability, should 
be subjected to invasive mechanical ventilation promptly. 
The invasive mechanical ventilation should adopt low tidal 
volume  “lung  protective  ventilation  strategy”  to  reduce 
ventilator related lung injury. If necessary, prone position 
ventilation, lung recruitment, or extracorporeal membrane 
oxygenation (ECMO) can be applied.

Circulation support

On the basis of full fluid resuscitation, improve microcircu-
lation, use vasoactive drugs, and monitor hemodynamics if 
necessary.

Traditional Chinese medicine

This disease belongs to the epidemic disease category of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine and results from contract-
ing epidemic pathogens. Different regions can refer to the 
following plans for dialectical treatment according to the 
patient’s conditions, local climate features, and physical 
characteristics of children.

Clinical treatment period

of  Zhihuangqi  (Prepared  Astragalus),  6–9  g 
of  Chaobaizhu  (Roasted  Rhizoma  Atractylo-
dis Macrocephalae), 3–9 g of Houpo (Officinal 
Magnolia Bark), 6–9 g of Cangzhu (Atractylodes 
lancea), 6–9 g of Chenpi (Pericarpium citri reticu-
latae), 3–6 g of Jiangbanxia (Ginger processed 
pinellia), 6–9 g of Huoxiang (Agastache rugosus), 
6 to 9 g of Fuling (Poria cocos), and 3–6 g of Zhi-
gancao (Prepared Liquorice Root).

2.  Old and damp tightening the lung:

(1)  Clinical manifestations: aversion to cold, fever or 
no fever, dry cough, sore throat, nasal congestion, 
tiredness and fatigue, nausea and retching, loose 
stool, pale tongue or reddish tongue with whitish-
greasy fur, floating, and soft pulse;

(2)  Therapeutic methods: dispersing lung to promote 
pathogenic factors, detoxify, and dispel dampness;
(3)  Prescription  and drugs: modified Qingqi decoction 
composed of 6–9 g of Cangzhu, 3–9 g of Houpo, 
6–9  g  of  Chenpi,  6–12  g  of  Huoxiang,  3–9  g 
of Banxia, 3–9 g of Xingren, 9–15 g of Suye, 6–9 g 
of Jiegeng, 6–9 g of Guanzhong, 6–9 g of Fuling, 
3–6 g of Shengjiang, and 3–6 g of Gancao.

3.  Plague poison obstructing lungs:

(1)  Clinical  manifestation:  fever  persists  or  chill 
and fever alternate; cough with little or yellow 
phlegm; shortness of breath holds back; abdomi-
nal distension constipation. The tongue is red, 
while the moss is yellow and greasy or yellow 
and dry. Slide number of arteries and veins;
(2)  Therapeutic methods: detoxification, opening and 
closing, clearing the lungs, and dampness;
(3)  Prescription  and  drugs:  modified  Xuanbai 
Chengqi decoction composed of 6–9 g of Huoxi-
ang, 10 g of Cangzhu, 3–6 g of Zhimahuang, 3 
-9 g of Chaoxingren, 15–30 g of  Shengshigao, 
10 g of Gualou, 3–6 g of Jiujun (to be added later 
in preparation), 6–9 g of Huangqin, 6–9 g of Ful-
ing, 6–9 g of Danpi, 6–9 g of Shichangpu, and 
3–6 g of Chuanbei.

1.  Asymptomatic infection:

4.  Inner blocking causing unconsciousness and collapse:

(1)  Therapeutic methods: strengthening the healthy 

and dispelling pathogenic factors;

(2)  Recommended  prescription  and  drugs:  modi-
fied  Yupingfeng  powder  in  combination  with 
Buhuanjin Zhengqi powder composed of 9–12 g 

(1)  Clinical manifestation: dyspnea, lethargy, rest-
lessness, cold and sweat in limb, dark purplish 
tongue, thick and slimy fur or dry fur, big floating 
and unstable pulse, cyanosis in fingerprints, and 
reaching for the Mingguan point (distal phalanx);

1 3 

World Journal of Pediatrics

(2)  Therapeutic methods: opening the blocking and 
solidification dysfunction, detoxifying, and reviv-
ing the unconscious;

3.  The detection of respiratory pathogenic nucleic acid is 
negative for two consecutive times (the sampling inter-
val is at least 1 day).

(3)  Prescriptions and drugs: modified Shenfu decoc-
tion  plus  Shengmai  drink  composed  of  3–6  g 
of Renshen (radix ginseng), 6–12 g of fuzi (radix 
aconiti  Praepareta)  (to  be  decocted  one  hour 
first). 6–12 g of Shanzhuyu (Fructus Corni), 10 g 
of Maimendong (Radix ophiopogonis), and 3–6 g 
of Rougui (Cinnamomum cassia), to be taken with 
Angong Niuhuang Pill.

5.  Qi deficiency of both the lung and spleen.

(1)  Clinical manifestation: feeble cough, lassitude and 
asthenia, spontaneous sweating, poor appetite, 
loose stool, pale tongue with whitish and slippery 
fur, thready, and weak pulse;

(2)  Therapeutic methods: nourishing the lungs and 
strengthening the spleen, nourishing qi, and dehu-
midifying;

(3)  Prescription and drugs: modified LiuJunZi decoc-
tion composed of 15 g of Zhihuangqi (Prepared 
Astragalus), 10 g of Xiyangshen (American Gin-
seng),  10  g  of  Chaobaizhu  (Roasted  Rhizoma 
Atractylodis Macrocephalae), 6 g of Fabanxia 
(Rhizoma Pinelliae preparatum), 6 g of Chenpi 
(Pericarpium  citri  reticulatae),  3  g  of  Chuan-
bei (Tendril-leaved fritillary bulb), 15 g of Ful-
ing (Poria cocos), 6 g of Huoxiang (Agastache 
rugosus), and 3 g of Sharen (Fructus amomi) (to 
be added in later).

Psychotherapy

Suspected patients can be discharged from isolation when 
the detection of respiratory pathogenic nucleic acid is nega-
tive for two consecutive times (the sampling interval is at 
least 1 day).

Prevention [33–35]

Novel coronavirus infection is a new communicable dis-
ease with an emergent outbreak that affects all popula-
tions. 2019-nCoV infection has been classified as category 
B infectious disease legally but managed as category A 
infectious disease. It is paramount to implement infection 
control practices by infection source controlling, transmis-
sion route blocking, and susceptible population protection.

Controlling infection sources

Patients infected with 2019-nCoV are the main infection 
sources. Children infected by novel coronavirus should 
be isolated at home or admitted to designated hospitals 
under the guidance of healthcare workers depending on the 
severity of their medical conditions. Try to provide single 
rooms for isolated children, and reduce the chance of con-
tact with the co-residents. There are enormous demands 
for room ventilation, necessary cleaning, and disinfection 
work for the articles used by children. Equally crucial is 
the need of equipment with disposable masks and properly 
disposal after use when taking care of the sick.

Psychological counseling plays an important role in disease 
recovery. If patients (especially older children) show mood 
swing, fear, or psychological disorders, active psychological 
intervention and treatment are needed.

Release and discharge criteria [3]

Confirmed  patients  can  be  discharged  from  isolation  or 
transferred to the corresponding departments for treatment 
of other diseases if all the following criteria are met:

1.  The body temperature returns to normal longer than 

3 days;

2.  The respiratory symptoms improve obviously;

Blocking transmission routes

1.  Preventing  transmission  by  respiratory  droplets  and 
contact: Cover mouth and nose with napkin or towel 
when coughing or sneezing. Wash hands for children 
frequently, or teach children seven-step washing tech-
nique. Try not to touch mouth, nose, or eyes before 
cleaning hands thoroughly after returning from public 
places, after covering the mouth when coughing, before 
eating or after using toilet; regularly disinfecting toys by 
heating at 56 °C for 30 min, 75% alcohol or chlorine-
containing disinfectants, and ultraviolet rays.

2.  Reduce exposure to infection: Avoid public transport at 
epidemic areas, and wear masks when going to crowded 
or poorly ventilated public places; avoid touching or eat-

1 3World Journal of Pediatrics 

ing wild animals, and going to markets selling with live 
animals.

3.  Children’s health monitoring: Children with a history of 
close contacts of infected patients need to be monitored 
for body temperature and clinical features routinely. 
When presenting with suspicious symptoms, children 
should be taken to a designated hospital for screening. 
Newborns delivered by infected mothers must complete 
a pathogen test and be isolated in a single ward or at 
home according to their medical conditions.

Boosting immunity

Balanced diet, oral health, adequate exercise, regular rest, 
avoiding excessive fatigue, and boosting immunity are the 
powerful measures to preventing infection, as well as main-
taining emotional stability and mental health. Vaccination 
is an effective way to prevent virus infection. The research 
and development of anti-virus vaccines has been carried out 
in China at present.
